MUSIC: AN ART AND A LANGUAGE
BY
WALTER RAYMOND SPALDING


CHAPTER I

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS


In approaching the study of any subject we may fairly expect that this
subject shall be defined, although some one has ironically remarked
that every definition is a misfortune. Music-lovers, however, will
rejoice that their favorite art is spared such a misfortune, for it
can not be defined. We know the factors of which music is constituted,
rhythm and sound; and we can trace the historic steps by which methods
of presentation and of style have been so perfected that by means of
this twofold material the emotions and aspirations of human beings may
be expressed and permanently recorded. We realize, and with our inborn
equipment can appreciate, the moving power of music; but to define, in
the usual sense of the term definition, what music really is, will be
forever impossible. The fact indeed that music--like love, electricity
and other elemental forces--cannot be defined is its special glory. It
is a peculiar, mysterious power;[1] quite in a class by itself,
although with certain aspects which it shares with the other arts. The
writings of all the great poets, such as Milton, Shakespeare, Browning
and Whitman, abound in eloquent tributes to the power and influence of
music, but it is noticeable that no one attempts to define it. The
mystery of music must be approached with reverence and music must be
loved for itself with perfect sincerity.

[Footnote 1: For suggestive comments on this point see the essays
_Harmonie et Melodie_ by Saint-Saëns, Chapters I and II.]

Some insight, however, may be gained into the nature of music by a
clear recognition of what it is _not_, and by a comparison with the
more definite and familiar arts. Music consists of the intangible and
elusive factors of rhythm and sound; in this way differing
fundamentally from the concrete static arts such as architecture,
sculpture and painting. Furthermore, instrumental music, _i.e._, music
freed from a dependence on words, is not an exact language like prose
and poetry. It speaks to our feelings and imaginations, as it were by
suggestion; reaching for this very reason depths of our being quite
beyond the power of mere words. No one can define rhythm except by
saying that rhythm, in the sense of motion, is the fundamental fact in
the universe and in all life, both physical and human. Everything in
the heavens above and in the earth beneath is in ceaseless motion and
change; nothing remains the same for two consecutive seconds. Even the
component parts of material--such as stone and wood, which we
ordinarily speak of as concrete and stationary--are whirling about
with ceaseless energy, and often in perfect rhythm. Thus we see how
natural and vital is the art of music, for it is inseparably connected
with life itself.

As for the other factor, sound is one of the most elemental and
mysterious of all physical phenomena.[2] When the air is set in motion
by the vibration of certain bodies of wood, metal and other material,
we know that sound waves, striking upon the tympanum of the ear,
penetrate to the brain and imagination. Sound is a reciprocal
phenomenon; for, even if there were systematic activity of vibrating
bodies, there could be no sound without some one to hear it.[3] Good
musicians are known for their power of keen and discriminating
hearing; and the ear,[4] as Saint-Saëns says, is the sole avenue of
approach to the musical sense. The first ambition for one who would
appreciate music should be to cultivate this power of hearing. It is
quite possible to be stone-deaf outwardly and yet hear most beautiful
sounds within the brain. This was approximately the case with
Beethoven after his thirtieth year. On the other hand, many people
have a perfect outward apparatus for hearing but nothing is registered
within.

[Footnote 2: See Chapter II of Gurney's _Power of Sound_, a book
remarkable for its insight.]

[Footnote 3: It is understood that this statement is made in a
subjective rather than a purely physical sense. See the _Century
Dictionary_ under _Sound_.]

[Footnote 4: Il y a donc, dans l'art des sons, quelque chose qui
traverse l'oreille comme un portique, la raison comme un vestibule et
qui va plus loin.

HARMONIE ET MELODIE, CHAPTER II.]

Combarieu, the French aesthetician, defines music as "the art of
thinking in tones."[5] There is food for thought in this statement,
but it seems to leave out one very important factor--namely, the
emotional. Every great musical composition reveals a carefully
planned and perfect balance between the emotional and intellectual
elements. And yet the basic impulse for the creation of music is an
emotional one; and, of all the arts, music makes the most direct
appeal to the emotions and to those shadowy, but real portions of our
being called the imagination and the soul. Emotion is as indispensable
to music as love to religion. Just as there can be no really great art
without passion, so we can not imagine music without all the emotions
of mankind: their loves, joys, sorrows, hatreds, ideals and subtle
fancies. Music, in fact, is a presentation of emotional experience,
fashioned and controlled by an overruling intellectual power.

[Footnote 5: _La musique, ses lois, son evolution_, by Jules
Combarieu.]

We can now foresee, though at first dimly, what is to be our line of
approach to this mystery. One of the peculiar characteristics of music
is that it is both the most natural and least artificial of the arts,
and as well the most complicated and subtle. On the one hand it is the
most natural and direct, because the materials of which it is
constituted--that is, sound and rhythm--make an instinctive appeal to
every normally equipped human being.[6] Every one likes to listen to
beautiful sounds merely for their sensuous effect, just as everyone
likes to look at the blue sky, the green grass and the changing hues
of a sunset; so the rhythm of music, akin to the human heart-beat and
to the ceaseless change and motion, which is the basic fact in all
life, appeals at once to our own physical vitality. This fact may be
observed at a symphony concert where so many people are wagging their
heads, beating time with their hands or even tapping on the floor with
their feet; a habit which shows a rudimentary love of music but which
for obvious reasons is not to be commended. On the other hand, music
is the most complicated of all the arts from the nature of its
constituent parts--intangible, evanescent sounds and rhythms--and from
the subtle grammar and structure by which these factors are used as
means of personal communication. This grammar of music, _i.e._, its
methods of structure and of presentation, has been worked out through
centuries of free experimentation on the part of some of the best
minds in the world, and thus any great musical composition is an
intellectual achievement of high rank. Behind the sensuous factors,
sound and rhythm, lies always the personal message of the composer,
and if we are to grasp this and to make it our own, we must go with
him hand in hand so that the music actually lives again in our minds
and imaginations. The practical inference from this dual nature of the
art we are considering is clear; everyone can derive a large amount of
genuine pleasure and even spiritual exaltation, can feel himself under
the influence of a strong tonic force, merely by putting himself in
contact with music, by opening his ears and drinking in the sounds and
rhythms in their marvellous variety. The all-sufficient reason for the
lack of a complete appreciation of music is that so many people stop
at this point, _i.e._ for them music is a sensuous art and nothing
more. Wagner himself, in fact, is on record in a letter to Liszt as
saying, in regard to the appreciation of his operas: "I require
nothing from the public but healthy senses and a human heart."
Although this may be particularly true of opera, which is a composite
form of art, making so varied an appeal to the participant that
everyone can get something from its picture of life--historical,
legendary, even fictitious--as well as from the actors, the costumes
and the story, the statement is certainly not applicable to what is
called absolute music, where music is disassociated from the guiding
help of words, and expressed by the media of orchestra, string
quartet, pianoforte, and various ensemble groups. For in addition to
its sensuous appeal, music is a language used as a means of personal
expression; sometimes in the nature of an intimate soliloquy, but far
more often as a direct means of communication between the mind and
soul of the composer and of the listener. To say that we understand
the message expressed in this language just because we happen to like
beautiful sounds and stimulating rhythms is surely to be our own
dupes. We might as well say that because we enjoy hearing Italians or
Frenchmen speak their own beautiful languages we are understanding
what they say. The question, therefore, faces us: how shall we learn
this mysterious language so as readily to understand it? And the
answer is equally inevitable: by learning something of the material of
which it is composed, and above all, the fundamental principles of its
structure.

[Footnote 6: Just as some people are color-blind there are those who
are tone-deaf--to whom, that is, music is a disagreeable noise--but
they are so few as to be negligible.]

In attempting to carry out this simple direction, however, we are
confronted by another of the peculiar characteristics of music. Music,
in distinction from the static, concrete and imitative arts, is always
in motion, and to follow it requires an intensity of concentration and
an accuracy of memory which can be acquired, but for which, like most
good things, we have to work. We all know the adage that "beauty is in
the eye of the beholder" and that any work of art must be recreated
in the imagination of the participant. The difficulty of this process
of recreation, as applied to music, is that we have, derived from our
ordinary daily experiences, so little to help us. Anyone can begin, at
least, to understand a work of architecture; it must have doors and
windows, and should conform to practical ideas of structure. In like
manner, a painting, either a portrait or a landscape, must show some
correspondence with nature herself, and so we have definite standards
to help our imagination. But music has worked out its own laws which
are those of pure fancy, having little to do with other forms of
thought; and unless we know something of the constructive principles,
instead of recreating the work before us, we are simply lost--"drowned
in a sea of sound"--often rudely shaken up by the rhythms, but far
from understanding what the music is really saying. As the well-known
critic, Santayana, wittily says, "To most people music is a drowsy
revery relieved by nervous thrills."

Notwithstanding, however, the peculiar nature of music and the
difficulty of gaining logical impressions as the sounds and rhythms
flood in upon us, there is one simple form of coöperation which solves
most of the difficulties; that is, familiarity. It is the duty of the
composer so to express himself, to make his meaning so clear, that we
can receive it with a minimum of mental friction if we can only get to
know the music. All really good music corresponds to such a standard;
that is, if it is needlessly involved, abstruse, diffuse, or turgid,
it is _in so far_ not music of the highest artistic worth. In this
connection we must always remember that music does not "stay put,"
like a picture on the wall. We cannot walk through it, as is the case
with a cathedral; turn back, as in a book; touch it, as with a statue.
It is not the expression of more or less definite ideas, such as we
find in prose and poetry. On the other hand, it rushes upon us with
the impassioned spirit of an eloquent orator, and what we get from it
depends almost entirely upon our own intensity of application and upon
our knowledge of the themes and of the general purpose of the work.
Only with increased familiarity does the architecture stand revealed.
Beethoven, it is said, when once asked the meaning of a sonata of his,
played it over again and replied, "It means that." Music is itself.
The question for every music-lover is: can I equip myself in such a
way as to feel at home in this language, to receive the message as
directly as possible, and finally with perfect ease and satisfaction?
This equipment demands a strong, accurate memory, a keen power of
discrimination and a sympathetic, open mind.

Another paradoxical characteristic of music on which it is interesting
to reflect is this: Music is the oldest as well as the youngest of the
arts, _i.e._, it has always[7] existed generically, and all human
beings born, as they are, with a musical instrument--the voice--are
_ipso facto_ musicians; and yet in boundless scope of possibilities it
is just in its infancy. For who can limit the combinations of sound
and rhythm, or forecast the range of the human imagination? The
creative fancy of the composer is always in advance of contemporary
taste and criticism. Hence, in listening to new music, we should
beware of reckless assertions of personal preference. The first
question, in the presence of an elaborate work of music, should never
be, "Do I like it or not?" but "Do I understand it?" "Is the music
conveying a logical message to me, or is it merely a sea of sound?"
The first and last article in the music-lover's creed, I repeat,
should be _familiarity_. When we thoroughly know a symphony, symphonic
poem or sonata so that, for example, we can sing the themes to
ourselves, the music will reveal itself. The difference between the
trained listener and the person of merely general musical tendencies
is that the former gains a definite meaning from the music often at a
first hearing; whereas, to the latter, many hearings are necessary
before he can make head or tail of the composition. Since the creative
composer of music is a thinker in tones, our perceptions must be so
trained that, as we listen, we make sense of the fabric of sounds and
rhythms.

[Footnote 7: From earliest times, mothers have doubtless crooned to
their infants in instinctive lullabies.]

It is evident from the foregoing observations that our approach to the
subject is to be on the intellectual side. Music, to be sure, is an
emotional art and so appeals to our emotions, but these will take care
of themselves. We all have a reasonable supply of emotion and
practically no human being is entirely deficient in the capacity for
being moved by music. We can, however, sharpen our wits and strengthen
our musical memories; for it is obvious that if we cannot recognize a
theme or remember it whenever it appears, often in an amplified or
even subtly disguised form, we are in no condition to follow and
appreciate the logical growth and development of the themes themselves
which, in a work of music, are just as real beings as the "dramatis
personae" in a play. The would-be appreciator should early recognize
the fact that listening to music is by no means passive, a means of
light amusement or to pass the time, but demands coöperation of an
active nature. Whether or not we have the emotional capacity of a
creator of music may remain an open question; but by systematic mental
application we _can_, as we listen to it, get from the music that
sense which the composer meant to convey. Music--more than the other
arts--demands, to use a happy expression of D.G. Mason, that we
"mentally organize our sensations and ideas"; for the language of
music has no such fixed grammar as verbal modes of expression, and the
message, even when received, is suggestive rather than definite. In
this way only can the composition be recreated in our imaginations.
For acquiring this habit of mind, this alertness and concentration,
the start, as always, is more than half the battle. Schumann's good
advice to young composers may be transferred to the listener: "Be sure
that you invent a thoroughly vital theme; the rest will grow of itself
from this." Likewise in listening to music, one should be sure to
grasp the opening theme, the fundamental motive, in order to follow it
intelligently and to enjoy its subsequent growth into the complete
work.[8]

[Footnote 8: In this connection we cannot refrain from suggesting the
improvement which should be made in the concert manners of the public.
How often, at the beginning of a concert, do we see people removing
their wraps, looking at their neighbors, reading the programme book,
etc., instead of concentrating on the music itself; with the result
that the composition is often well on its way before such people have
found their bearings.]

Every piece of music, with the exception of intentionally rhapsodic
utterances, begins with some group of notes of distinct rhythmic and
melodic interest, which is the germ--the generative force--of the
whole, and which is comparable to the text of a sermon or the subject
of a drama. This introductory group of notes is called, technically, a
_motive_ or moving force and may be defined as _the simplest unit of
imaginative life in terms of rhythm and sound_, which instantly
impresses itself upon our consciousness and, when heard several times,
cannot be forgotten or confused with any other motive. A musical
theme--a longer sweep of thought (to be explained later)--may consist
of several motives of which the first is generally the most important.
Just here lies the difference between the Heaven-born themes of a
truly creative composer and the bundle of notes put forth by lesser
men. These living themes pierce our imaginations and sing in our
memories, sometimes for years, whereas the inept and flabby tunes of
certain so-called composers make no strong impression and are
forgotten almost as soon as heard. Motives obviously differ from each
other in regard to the intervals of the tones composing them, _i.e._,
the up and down relationship in pitch, the duration of the tones and
their grouping into metric schemes. But a real motive is always terse,
concise, characteristic and pregnant with unrevealed meaning. The
chief glory of such creative tone-poets as Beethoven, Wagner, Brahms
and Franck is that their imaginations could give birth to musical
offspring that live for ever and are loved like life itself. The first
step, then, in the progress of the appreciator of music is the
recognition of the chief motive or motives of a composition and the
development of power to follow them in their organic growth. This
ability is particularly necessary in modern music: for frequently all
four movements of a symphony or string-quartet are based upon a motive
which keeps appearing--often in altered form and in relationships
which imply a dramatic or suggestive meaning. A few of such motives
are cited herewith, taken from works with which, as we proceed, we
shall become familiar.

[Music: CÉSAR FRANCK: _Symphony in D minor_]

[Music: BRAHMS: _First Symphony in C minor_]

[Music: TCHAIKOWSKY: _5th Symphony_]

[Music: DVO[VR]ÁK: Symphony _From the New World_]

It is now necessary for the student to know something about the
constructive principles by which large works of music are fashioned;
not so much that he could compose these works himself, even if he had
the inspiration, but to know enough, so that the reception of the
music is not a haphazard activity but an intellectual achievement,
second only to that of the original creator. Every genuine work of art
in whatever medium, stone, color, word or tone, must exhibit _unity of
general effect with variety of detail_. That is, the material must
hold together, be coherent and convince the participant of the logical
design of the artist; not fall apart as might a bad building, or be
diffuse as a poorly written essay. And yet, with this coherence, there
must always be stimulating and refreshing variety; for a too constant
insistence on the main material produces intolerable monotony, such as
the "damnable iteration" of a mediocre prose work or the harping away
on one theme by the hack composer. In no art more than music is this
dual standard of greater importance, and in no art more difficult to
attain. For the raw material of music, fleeting rhythms and waves of
sound, is in its very nature most incoherent. Here we are not dealing
with the concrete, tangible and definite material which is available
for all the other arts, but with something intangible and elusive. We
know from the historical record[9] of musical development, that, only
after centuries of experimentation conducted by some of the best
intellects in Europe, was sufficient coherence gained so that there
could be composed music which would compare with the simplest modern
hymn-tune or part-song. And this was long after each of the other
arts--architecture, sculpture, painting and literature--had reached
points of attainment which, in many respects, have never since been
equalled.

[Footnote 9: Compare Parry's _Evolution of the Art of Music_, passim
and D.G. Mason's _Beethoven and his Forerunners_, Chapter I.]

Before carrying our inquiries further, something must be said about
the two main lines of musical development which led up to music as we
know it to-day. These tendencies are designated by the terms
_Homophonic_ and _Polyphonic_. By homophonic,[10] from Greek words
signifying a "single voice," is meant music consisting of a _single_
melodic line, as in the whole field of folk-songs (which originally
were always unaccompanied) or in the unison chants of the Greeks and
the Gregorian tones of the early church, in which there is _one
melody_ though many voices may unite in singing it. Later we shall see
what important principles for the growth of instrumental music were
borrowed from the instinctive practise associated with the folk-song
and folk-dance. But history makes clear that the fundamental
principles of musical coherence were worked out in the field of music
known as the _Polyphonic_. By this term, as the derivation implies, is
meant music the fabric of which is made by the interweaving of
_several_ independent melodies. For many centuries the most reliable
instrument was the human voice and the only art-music, _i.e._, music
which was the result of conscious mental and artistic endeavor, was
vocal music for groups of unaccompanied voices in the liturgy of the
church. About the tenth century, musicians tried the crude
experiment,[11] called Organum, of making two groups of singers move
in parallel fifths _e.g._,

[Music: Tu Patris sempiternus es Filius.]

but during the 13th and 14th centuries a method was worked out by
which the introductory tune was made to generate its own subsequent
tissue. It was found that a body of singers could announce a melody of
a certain type and that, after they had proceeded so far, a second set
of singers could repeat the opening melodic phrase--and so likewise
often a third and a fourth set--and that all the voices could be made
to blend together in a fairly harmonious whole.[12] A piece of music
of this systematic structure is called a _Round_ because the singers
take up the melody in _rotation_ and at regular rhythmic periods.[13]
The earliest specimen of a Round is the famous one "Sumer is icumen
in" circa 1225 (see Supplement of musical Examples No. 1), which shows
to what a high point of perfection--considering those early
days--musicians had brought their art. For, at any rate, by these
systematic, imitative repetitions they had secured the first requisite
of all music, coherence. This principle, once it was sanctioned by
growing musical instinct, and approved by convention, was developed
into such well-known types of polyphonic music as the Canon, the
Invention and the Fugue; terms which will be fully explained later on.
It is of more than passing interest to realize that these structural
principles of music were worked out in the same locality--Northern
France and the Netherlands, and by kindred intellects--as witnessed
the growth of Gothic architecture; and there is a fundamental affinity
between the interweavings of polyphonic or, as it is often called,
_contrapuntal_[14] music and the stone traceries in medieval
cathedrals. During the 13th and 14th centuries northern France, with
Paris as its centre, was the most cultivated part of Europe, and the
Flemish cities of Cambrai, Tournai, Louvain and Antwerp will always be
renowned in the history of art, as the birthplace of Gothic
architecture, of modern painting and of polyphonic music.[15] A great
deal of the impetus towards the systematic repetition of the voice
parts must have been caused by practical necessity (thus justifying
the old adage); for, before the days of printed music, or even of a
well-established tradition--when everything had to be laboriously
written out or transmitted orally--whole compositions could be
rendered by the singers through the simple device of remembering the
introductory theme and joining in from memory whenever their turn
came. Compositions in fact were often so recorded.[16] The following
old English round (circa 1609) shows clearly how the voices entered in
rotation.

[Music:

1 Three blind mice, three blind mice

2 ran around thrice, ran around thrice; The

3 miller and his merry old wife ne'er laugh'd so much in all their
life.]

For a Round in strict canonic imitation by the famous English composer
William Byrd (1542-1623) see the Supplement, Example No. 2. In due
time singers of that period became likewise very proficient in
improvising free parts about a given melody or _cantus firmus_, a
practice indicated by the term "musica ficta" which was beneficial in
stimulating the imagination to a genuine musical activity.

[Footnote 10: In comparatively recent times the term has been widened
to include music in which there is one _chief_ melody to which other
portions of the musical texture are subordinate; _e.g._, the
homophonic style of Chopin in whose works the chief melody, often in
the upper voice, seems to float on underlying waves of sound.]

[Footnote 11: For a complete account of these early attempts which
finally led to part-writing see Chapter IV in the first volume of the
_Oxford History of Music_.]

[Footnote 12: An historical account of this development as far as it
is ascertainable may be found in the fifth chapter of Pratt's _History
of Music_.]

[Footnote 13: Consult the article on the Round in _Grove's
Dictionary_.]

[Footnote 14: A rather crude English adaptation of the Latin term
"Punctus contra punctum" which refers to the notes as punct[=u]s
(plural) or dots which were pricked with a stylus into the medieval
manuscripts. In this phrase the emphasis is on the _contra_,
signifying a combination of _different_ melodies and rhythms, and
calling attention to that higher importance which, everywhere in art,
is caused by contrasted elements.]

[Footnote 15: For an interesting account of this tripartite activity
see Naumann's _History of Music_.]

[Footnote 16: See the facsimile of the original manuscript of "_Sumer
is icumen in_" cited in the first volume of the _Oxford History of
Music_, pp. 326-332.]

We can now begin to realize the importance of polyphonic music. In
fact, it is not too much to assert that _systematic repetition_ in
some form or other (several aspects of which we shall describe in due
season) is the most important constructive principle in music,
necessitated by the very nature of the material. This statement can be
corroborated by a glance at almost any page of music considered merely
as a _pattern_, quite regardless how the notes sound. We observe at
once that some portions of the page look much or exactly like other
portions. Frequently whole movements or long parts of a work are based
entirely upon some terse and characteristic motive. Famous examples of
this practise are the first movement of Beethoven's _Fifth Symphony in
C minor_ which, with certain subsidiary themes to afford contrast, is
entirely based on the motive:

[Music]

the Finale of Wagner's opera _The Valkyrie_ (see Supplement, Example
No. 3) the chief motive of which

[Music]

is presented in every phase of modulatory and rhythmic development,
and the middle portion of the _Reconnaissance_ from Schumann's
_Carnaval_ (see Supplement, Example No. 4.)

Music, just because its substance is so elusive and requires such
alert attention on the part of the listener, cannot continually
present new material[17] without becoming diffuse; but instead, must
make its impression by varied emphasis upon the main thought.
Otherwise it would become so discursive that one could not possibly
follow it. From these historical facts as to the structure of music
certain inferences may be drawn; the vital importance of which to the
listener can hardly be exaggerated. As polyphonic treatment (the
imitation and interweaving of independent melodic lines) is the
foundation of any large work of music, be it symphony, symphonic poem
or string quartet, so the listener must acquire what may be called a
_polyphonic ear_. For with the majority of listeners, the whole
difficulty and the cause of their dissatisfaction with so-called
"classic music" is merely lack of equipment. Everyone can hear the
tune in the soprano or upper voice, for the intensity of pitch makes
it stand out with telling effect; and, as a fact, many of the best
tunes in musical literature are so placed. But how about the tune when
it is in the _bass_ as is the case so frequently in Beethoven's
Symphonies or in Wagner's Operas? Some of the most eloquent parts of
the musical message are, indeed, often in the bass, the foundation
voice, and yet these are entirely ignored by the average listener.
Then what of the inner voices; and what--most important of all--when
there are beautiful melodies in _all parts_ of the musical fabric,
often sounding simultaneously, as in such well-known works as César
Franck's _Symphony in D minor_ and Wagner's _Prelude to the
Mastersingers_! As we face these questions squarely the need for the
listener of special training in alertness and concentration is
self-evident. A very small proportion of those who attend a symphony
concert begin to get their money's worth--to put the matter on a
perfectly practical plane--for at least 50% of the musical structure
is presented to ears without capacity for receiving it. In regard to
any work of large dimensions the final test is this: can we sing all
the themes and follow them in their polyphonic development? Then only
are we really acquainted with the work; then only, in regard to
personal like or dislike, have we any right to pass judgment upon it.
The absurd attitude, far too common, of hasty, ill-considered
criticism is illustrated by the fact that while Brahms is said to have
worked for ten years on that Titanic creation, his _First Symphony_,
yet persons will hear it _once_ and have the audacity to say they do
not like it. As well stroll through Chartres Cathedral and say they
did not think much of it!

[Footnote 17: For a simple, charming example of persistent use of a
motive see Schumann's pianoforte piece _Kind im Einschlummern_, No. 12
of the _Kinderscenen_.]

We must now speak of the two other manifestations of the principle of
_repetition_. Fundamentally, to be sure, they are not connected with
polyphonic music; the third type, in fact,--restatement after
contrast--being instinctively worked out in the Folk-Song (as will be
made plain later) and definitely ratified as a structural principle by
the Italian opera composer Alessandro Scarlatti in the well-known Aria
da capo. These further applications of the principle of imitation are
_Transposition_, _i.e._, the repetition of the melodic outline, and
often of the whole harmonic fabric, by shifting it up or down the
scale; and the _Restatement_ of the original melody after an
intervening part in contrast, thus making a piece of music, the
formula for which may be indicated by A, B, Á. Anyone at all familiar
with musical literature must have observed both of these devices for
securing coherence and organic unity; in fact, the principle of
restatement after contrast is at the foundation of any large work, and
supplies the connecting link between the structure of the Folk-Song
and that of the most elaborate modern music. A convincing illustration
of the use of Transposition may be found in Schumann's _Arabesque_,

[Music]

and in the opening theme of Beethoven's _Waldstein Sonata_, op. 53.

[Music]

It was a favorite device of Beethoven to impress the main theme upon
the hearer by definite repetitions on various degrees of the
scale.[18] For an elaborate example of Transposition nothing can
surpass the opening movement of César Franck's _D Minor Symphony_, the
entire first part of which consists of a literal repetition in F minor
of what has been previously announced in D minor.

[Footnote 18: Another well-known example is the first theme of the
first movement of the _Sonata in F minor_ (_Appassionata_) op. 57.
This the student can look up for himself.]

Pieces of music which embody the principle of _Restatement after
Contrast_ are so numerous that the question is merely one of selecting
the clearest examples. In the Folk-Songs of every nation, as soon as
they had passed beyond the stage of a monotonous reiteration of some
phrase which pleased the fancy, _e.g._

[Music: _ad infinitum!_]

we find hardly one in which there is not a similarity between the
closing measures and something which had gone before. (See Supplement,
Example No. 5.) For the most elementary artistic experience would
establish the fact that the only way to avoid a monotonous repetition
of the same theme is to change to a different one. And the next step
is equally axiomatic--that, presupposing the first theme gives
pleasure on its initial appearance, it will be heard with heightened
pleasure at its reappearance after intervening contrast. A
psychological principle is herein involved which cannot be proved but
which is self-justified by its own reasonableness and is further
exemplified by many experiences in daily life. Sweet things taste the
sweeter after a contrast with something acid; we like to revisit old
scenes and to return home after a vacation. No delight is keener than
the _renewal_ of some aesthetic experience after its temporary
effacement through a change of appeal.[19] This practice is associated
with the inherent demand, spoken of above, for Variety in Unity. No
theme is of sufficient import to bear constant repetition; in fact,
the more eloquent it is, the more sated should we become if it were
continued overlong. Monotony, furthermore, is less tolerable in music
than in the other arts because music cuts deeper, because the ear is
so sensitive an organ and because we have no way of shutting off
sound. If a particular sight or scene displeases, we can close our
eyelids; but the ear is entirely unprotected and the only way to
escape annoying sounds is to take to flight.[20] We inevitably crave
contrast, change of sensation; and nothing gives more organic unity
than a return to whatever impressed us at the outset. This cyclic form
of musical expression, early discovered through free experimentation,
has remained the leading principle in all modern works, and--because
derived directly from life and nature--must be permanent. We return
whence we came; everything goes in circles. We can now understand
still more the need of a strong and accurate memory; for if we do not
know whether or not we have ever heard a theme, obviously the keen
pleasure of welcoming it anew is lost to us. Furthermore, this
principle of Restatement has in modern music some very subtle uses,
and presupposes the acquisition of a real power of reminiscence. For
example, Wagner's tone-drama of _Tristan and Isolde_ begins with this
haunting motive

[Music]

which, with its dual melodic lines, typifies the passionate love of
the two chief characters in the story. After three hours or more of
tragic action and musical development this motive is again introduced
in the very closing measures of the drama, to show that even in the
presence of transfiguring death this love is still their guiding
power.

[Music]

[Footnote 19: For some additional comments on this broad principle see
the first Chapter (passim) of Parry's _Evolution of the Art of
Music_.]

[Footnote 20: Everyone has experienced the agony of hearing the
beginner practice, in an adjoining room, the same piece for hours at a
time!]

For those who can appreciate the significance of such treatment, this
reminiscence is one of the most sublime touches in all musical drama.
The fascinating orchestral Scherzo of Richard Strauss's _Till
Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks_ likewise begins with a characteristic
motto,

[Music]

which says, in the language of music--I now have a story to tell you
of a certain freakish character; and then we are regaled with the
musical portrayal of a series of Till's pranks. As an Epilogue,
Strauss improvises on this opening theme as much as to say--you have
listened to my musical story, now let us indulge in some reflections
as to the fate of poor Till, for after all he was a good fellow. (See
Supplement, Example No. 6.)

It is evident, therefore, from the foregoing examples that the basic
principles of musical structure are coherence, refreshing variety and
such unity of general impression as may be gained chiefly by a
restatement, after contrast, of themes previously heard. Our
subsequent study will simply illustrate these natural laws of music in
their wider application.




CHAPTER II

THE FOLK-SONG


In the preceding chapter we made some general inquiries into the
nature of music and of those methods by which emotion and thought are
expressed. We shall assume therefore that the following facts are
established: that in music, by reason of the intangibility and
elusiveness of the material, sound and rhythm, the principle of Unity
in Variety is of paramount importance; and that the hearer, if he
would grasp the message expressed by these sounds and rhythms, must
make a _conscious_ effort of coöperation and not be content with mere
dreamy apathy. Furthermore, that Unity and Coherence are gained in
music by applying the principle of systematic Repetition or Imitation.
(We shall see, as we continue, how Variety has been secured by
contrasting themes, by episodical passages and by various devices of
rhythmic and harmonic development.)

We may now investigate the growth of musical structure and expression,
as manifested in the fields of the Folk-Song and of Polyphonic music,
beginning with the Folk-Song--historically the older and more
elemental in its appeal. We cannot imagine the time when human beings
did not use their voices in some form of emotional outpouring; and, as
far back as there are any historical records, we find traces of such
activity. For many centuries these rude cries of savage races were far
removed from anything like artistic design, but the advance towards
coherence and symmetry was always the result of free experimentation--hence
vitally connected with the emotions and mental processes of all human
effort. One of the most significant of the many sayings attributed to
Daniel Webster is that "Sovereignty rests with the people"; and it is
an interesting inquiry to see what wider application may be made of
this statement in the field of art. For it is a fact that there has
seldom been an important school of music, so-called--in any given
place and period--which was not founded on the emotional traits, the
aspirations and the ideals of the people. Surely one of the distinct
by-products of the Great War is to be the emancipation of the art of
music, along with that of all the other arts. Such a realization of
its nature and powers will result that it shall no longer be a mere
exotic amusement of the leisure and wealthy classes, but shall be
brought into direct touch with the rank and file of the people; even,
if you will, with the so-called "lower classes"--that part of humanity
from which, indeed, it sprung and with which it really belongs--just
human beings, just people. So in music also we may assert that
"Sovereignty rests with the people." Although all art reflects popular
sentiment to a certain extent, in no one of the arts--as painting,
sculpture and architecture--is there such a vital record of the
emotions and artistic instincts of humanity as we find in the realm of
folk-song.[21] During the early period of Church music, while
theorists and scholars were struggling with the intricate problems of
polyphonic style, the people in their daily secular life were finding
an outlet for their emotions, for their joys and sorrows, in song and
in dance. This instinct for musical expression is universal, and just
because the products of such activity were unfettered by rules, they
exercised in process of time much influence upon the development of
modern style. Folk-songs are characterized by a freshness and
simplicity, a directness of utterance, which are seldom attained by
the conscious efforts of genius. "Listen carefully to all folk-songs,"
says Schumann. "They are a storehouse of beautiful melody, and unfold
to the mind the innate character of the different peoples." They are
like wild flowers blooming unheeded by the wayside, the product of the
race rather than the individual, and for centuries were only slightly
known to cultivated musicians. It should be understood that words and
music were inextricably bound together and that, with both, dancing
was naturally associated; the very essence of a people's life being
expressed by this tripartite activity. Tonal variety is a marked
feature in folk-songs, many of them being in the old Gregorian modes,
while others show a decided inclination to our modern major and minor
scales. Great is the historical importance of Folk-music, because in
it we see a dawning recognition of the principles of instrumental
form, _i.e._, the need of balanced phrases, caused in the songs by the
metrical structure of the words, and in the dances by the symmetrical
movements of the body; a recognition above all, of the application of
a definite system of tonal-centres, and of repetition after contrast.
In fact, as we look back it is evident that the outlines of our most
important design, that known as the Sonata Form are--in a rudimentary
state--found in folk-music. Folk-melodies and rhythms play a large
part in the music of Haydn, Schubert, Chopin, Liszt, Brahms, Grieg,
Tchaikowsky and Dvo[vr]ák. It seems as if modern composers were doing
for music what Luther Burbank has done for plant life; for by grafting
modern thought and feeling on to the parent stock of popular music,
they have secured a vigor attainable in no other way. Thus some of the
noblest melodies of Brahms, Grieg, and Tchaikowsky are actual
folk-tunes with slight variation or original melodies conceived in a
folk-song spirit.[22]

[Footnote 21: For an eloquent presentation of the significance of
Folk-music see the article by Henry F. Gilbert in the _Musical
Quarterly_ for October, 1917.]

[Footnote 22: For an able account of the important role that
folk-melodies are taking in modern music see Chapter V of _La Chanson
Populaire en France_ by Julian Tiersot.]

As music, unlike the other arts, lacks any model in the realm of
nature, it has had to work out its own laws, and its spontaneity and
directness are the result. It has not become imitative, utilitarian or
bound by arbitrary conventions. As Berlioz says in the _Grotesques de
la Musique_: "Music exists by itself; it has no need of poetry, and if
every human language were to perish, it would be none the less the
most poetic, the grandest and the freest of all the arts." When we
reach the centuries in which definite records are available, we find a
wealth of folk-songs from the Continental nations: Irish, Scotch,
English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Russian, etc.[23] In these
we can trace the transition from the old modes to our modern major and
minor scales; the principles of tonality and of rudimentary
modulation, the dividing of the musical thought into periodic lengths
by means of cadential endings, the instinct for contrast and for the
unity gained by restatement. No better definition of Folk-songs can be
given than that of Parry in his _Evolution of the Art of Music_ where
he calls them "the first essays made by man in distributing his notes
so as to express his feelings in terms of design." In folk-tunes this
design has been dominated by the metrical phraseology of the poetic
stanzas with which they were associated; for between the structure of
melody and that of poetry there is always a close correspondence. In
Folk-songs, therefore, we find a growing instinct for balanced musical
expression and, above all, an application of the principle of
Restatement after Contrast. The following example drawn from Irish
Folk-music[24]--which, for emotional depth, is justly considered the
finest in the world--will make the point clear.

[Music: THE FLIGHT OF THE EARLS]

[Footnote 23: The same statement is true of the Oriental nations, the
Arabians, Persians and Greeks, who are left out of the enumeration
only because their development in many respects has been along
different lines from ours. For suggestive speculations as to early
music among all nations see _Primitive Music_ by Richard Wallaschek.]

[Footnote 24: For illuminating comments on the Folk-music of all the
English-speaking peoples see Chapter XII of Ernest Walker's _History
of Music in England_. The famous Petrie collection of Irish Folk-tunes
should also be consulted.]

The statement is sometimes made that the principles of our modern
system of tonality and of modulation are derived from Folk-music. This
is only partially true, for pure Folk-songs always developed under the
influence of the old medieval modes, long before the establishment of
our fixed major and minor scales. Furthermore, as these were single
unaccompanied melodies, they showed slight connection with modulation
or change of key in the modern sense of the term--which implies a
system of harmonization in several voices. It is true that there was
an instinctive and growing recognition of the importance of the three
chief tonal centres: the Tonic or Keynote, the Dominant (a perfect
fifth _above_) and the Subdominant (a perfect fifth _below_) and at
times the relative minor. All these changes are illustrated in the
melody just cited; _e.g._, in the fourth measure[25] there is an
implication of E minor, in measures seven and eight there is a
distinct modulation to D major, the Dominant, and in the ninth measure
to C major, the Subdominant. This acceptance of other tonal
centres--distant a fifth from the main key-note--doubtless arose from
their simplicity and naturalness, and was later sanctioned by
acoustical law; the interval of a perfect fifth having one of the
simplest ratios (2-3), and being familiar to people as the first
overtone (after the octave) struck off by any sounding body--such as a
bell or an organ pipe. The Venetian composers, notably Willaert, had
also quite fully developed this principle of Tonic, Dominant and
Subdominant harmony in order to give homogeneity to their antiphonal
choruses. Even to-day these tonal centres are still used; for they are
elemental, like the primitive colors of the spectroscope. But
modulation, in the modern sense of a free shifting of the centre of
gravity to _any one_ of the twelve semitones of our chromatic scale,
was not developed and accepted until after the acoustical reforms of
Rameau, and the system of tuning keyed instruments embodied in that
work called the _Well-tempered Clavichord_ of Sebastian Bach. Both
these men published their discoveries about the year 1720.

[Footnote 25: In counting the measures of a phrase always consider the
first _complete_ measure,--_never_ a partial measure--as _one_.]

As we have just used the term _modal_, and since many Folk-songs in
the old modes sound peculiar or even wrong (hence the preposterous
emendations of modern editors!) because our ears can listen only in
terms of the fixed major and minor scales, a few words of explanation
concerning the nature of the medieval modes should here be given.
Their essential peculiarity is the freer relationship of tones and
semitones than is found in the definite pattern of our modern scales.
It is of great importance that the music-lover should train himself to
think naturally in these modes; for there has been a significant
return to their freedom and variety on the part of such modern
composers as Brahms, Tchaikowsky, Dvo[vr]ák, d'Indy, Debussy and
others, and some of their most individual effects are gained through
the introduction of modal types of expression. The following modes are
those most commonly employed in the formation of Folk-songs.

[Music: DORIAN]

[Music: PHRYGIAN]

[Music: LYDIAN]

[Music: MIXOLYDIAN]

[Music: AEOLIAN]

[Music: IONIAN]

The Dorian mode, at the outset, is identical with our modern minor
scale; its peculiarity lies in the _semitone_ between the 6th and 7th
degrees and the _whole_ tone between the 7th and 8th. An excellent
example of a modern adaptation of this mode may be found in Guilmant's
March for organ (see Supplement, Example No. 7). The mysterious
opening measures of Debussy's opera _Pelléas et Mélisande_ also owe
their atmosphere to this mode, _e.g._

[Music]

The Phrygian mode is one of the most individual to our modern ears
with its first step a _semitone_ and with the _whole_ tone between the
7th and 8th degrees. Under the influence of harmonic development there
was worked out a cadence, known as Phrygian, which is often found in
modern music, _e.g._

[Music]

The opening measures of the slow movement of Brahms's _Fourth
Symphony_ are an excellent example of a melody in the Phrygian mode,
_e.g._

[Music]

The contrast between these measures, with their archaic flavor, and
the sudden change in measure four to the modern tonality of E major,
is very striking. Bach's well-known choral, _O Sacred Head now
wounded_ also begins in the Phrygian mode, _e.g._

[Music]

For a beautiful modern example of this Phrygian mode see the
introduction to F.S. Converse's _Dramatic Poem Job_, for voices and
orchestra.

The Lydian mode is identical with our major scale except for the
semitone between the 4th and 5th degrees. That this change, however,
gives a very characteristic effect may be seen in the passage by
Beethoven from his String-Quartet op. 132--_Song of Thanksgiving_ in
the Lydian mode (see Supplement Ex. No. 8). The Mixolydian mode is
also identical with our modern major scale except for the _whole_ tone
between the 7th and 8th degrees. This mode has had very slight usage
in modern music; because, with the development of harmony,[26] the
instinct became so strong for a leading tone (the 7th degree)--only a
semitone distant from the upper tonic--that the original whole tone
has gradually disappeared. The Aeolian Mode, mainly identical with our
customary minor scale, has the characteristic whole tone between the
7th and 8th degrees. Examples of this mode abound in modern
literature; two excellent instances being the first theme of the
Finale of Dvo[vr]ák's _New World Symphony_, _e.g._,

[Music]

and the following passage from the _Legend_ for à capella voices of
Tchaikowsky, _e.g._

[Music]

The Ionian mode corresponds exactly with our modern major scale, and
the common people among all nations early showed a strong predilection
for its use. The Church, in fact, because of this popularity with the
people, named it the "modus lascivus" and prohibited its use in the
ecclesiastical liturgy. One of the very earliest Folk-tunes
extant--"Sumer is icumen in" (already referred to)--is in the Ionian
mode and, according to Cecil Sharp,[27] the majority of English
Folk-tunes are in this same mode.

[Footnote 26: The chief reason for this leading tone, in addition to
the natural tendency of singers to raise their voices as near as
possible to the upper tonic, was so that the dominant chord, the third
of which is always the 7th degree, might invariably be a _Major_
Triad.]

[Footnote 27: For many suggestive comments on the whole subject see
his book _English Folk-Song_.]

We now cite a few typical folk-songs (taken from national sources)
which, in their structure, show a natural instinct for balance of
phrase and oftentimes for that organic unity of effect gained by
restatement after contrast.

[Music: THE TRUE LOVERS' FAREWELL

Old English]

The pattern of this song, in the Aeolian mode, is A, A, A, B. Unity is
secured by the three-fold appearance of the first phrase; and a
certain balance, by having the second phrase B twice as long (four
measures) as A.

[Music: THE SHIP IN DISTRESS

Old English]

The formula of this characteristic song in the Dorian mode is A, A, B,
A; merely an extension, through repetition, of the simple type A, B, A
which, in turn, is the basis of the fundamental structure known as the
three-part form. This will later be studied in detail. It is evident
to the musical sense how complete a feeling of coherence is gained by
the return to A after the intervening contrast of the phrase B;
evident, also, that this song is a perfect example of the principle of
unity combined with variety.

We further cite a few examples from Scottish, Irish, French, Hungarian
and Russian sources. They all illustrate quaint melodic intervals and
an instinct for balance and symmetry.
