Famous Violinists of To-day and Yesterday

By

Henry C. Lahee

CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.


There is no instrument of music made by the hands of man that holds such
a powerful sway over the emotions of every living thing capable of
hearing, as the violin. The singular powers of this beautiful instrument
have been eloquently eulogised by Oliver Wendell Holmes, in the
following words:

"Violins, too. The sweet old Amati! the divine Stradivari! played on by
ancient maestros until the bow hand lost its power, and the flying
fingers stiffened. Bequeathed to the passionate young enthusiast, who
made it whisper his hidden love, and cry his inarticulate longings, and
scream his untold agonies, and wail his monotonous despair. Passed from
his dying hand to the cold virtuoso, who let it slumber in its case for
a generation, till, when his hoard was broken up, it came forth once
more, and rode the stormy symphonies of royal orchestras, beneath the
rushing bow of their lord and leader. Into lonely prisons with
improvident artists; into convents from which arose, day and night, the
holy hymns with which its tones were blended; and back again to orgies,
in which it learned to howl and laugh as if a legion of devils were shut
up in it; then, again, to the gentle _dilettante_, who calmed it down
with easy melodies until it answered him softly as in the days of the
old maestros; and so given into our hands, its pores all full of music,
stained like the meerschaum through and through with the concentrated
hue and sweetness of all the harmonies which have kindled and faded on
its strings."

Such, indeed, has been the history of many a noble instrument fashioned
years and years ago, in the days when violin playing did not hold the
same respect and admiration that it commands at the present time.

The evolution of the violin is a matter which can be traced back to the
dark ages, but the fifteenth century may be considered as the period
when the art of making instruments of the viol class took root in Italy.
It cannot be said, however, that the violin, with the modelled back
which gives its distinctive tone, made its appearance until the middle
of the sixteenth century. In France, England, and Germany, there was
very little violin making until the beginning of the following century.
Andrea Amati was born in 1520, and he was the founder of the great
Cremona school of violin makers, of which Nicolo Amati, the grandson of
Andrea, was the most eminent. The art of violin making reached its
zenith in Italy at the time of Antonio Stradivari, who lived at Cremona.
He was born in 1644, and lived until 1737, continuing his labours almost
to the day of his death, for an instrument is in existence made by him
in the year in which he died. It is an interesting fact that the art of
violin making in Italy developed at the time when the painters of Italy
displayed their greatest genius, and when the fine arts were encouraged
by the most distinguished patronage.

As the art of violin making developed, so did that of violin playing,
but, whereas the former reached its climax with Stradivari, the latter
is still being developed, as new writers and players find new
difficulties and new effects. While there are many proofs that
orchestras existed, and that violins of all sizes were used in
ecclesiastical music, there is still some doubt as to who was the first
solo violinist of eminence. The earliest of whom we have any account
worthy of mention, was Baltazarini, a native of Piedmont, who went to
France in 1577 to superintend the music of Catharine de Medici. In 1581
he composed the music for the nuptials of the Duke de Joyeuse with Mlle.
de Vaudemont, sister of the queen, and this is said to have been the
origin of the heroic and historical ballet in France.

The progress of violin playing can also be judged somewhat by the
compositions written for the instrument. Of these the earliest known is
a "Romanesca per violone Solo e Basso se piaci," and some dances, by
Biagio Marini, published in 1620. This contains the "shake." Then there
is a "Toccata" for violin solo, by Paolo Quagliati, published in 1623,
and a collection of violin pieces by Carlo Farina, published in 1627 at
Dresden, in which the variety of bowing, double stopping, and chords
shows a great advance in the demands upon the execution.

Farina held the position of solo violinist at the Court of Saxony, and
has been called the founder of the race of violin virtuosi. One of his
compositions, named "Cappriccio Stravagante," requires the instrument to
imitate the braying of an ass, and other sounds belonging to the animal
kingdom, as well as the twanging of guitars and the fife and drum of the
soldier.

Eighteen sonatas composed by Giovanni Battista Fontana, and published at
Venice in 1641, show a distinct advance in style, and Tomasso Antonio
Vitali, himself a famous violinist, wrote a "Chaconne" of such merit
that it was played by no less a virtuoso than Joachim, at the Monday
popular concerts in London, in 1870, nearly two hundred years after its
composition.

Italy was the home of the violin, of composition for the violin, and of
violin playing, for the first school was the old Italian school, and
from Italy, by means of her celebrated violinists, who travelled and
spread throughout Europe, the other schools were established.

Violin playing grew in favour in Italy, France, Germany, and England at
about the same time, but in England it was many years before the
violinist held a position of any dignity. The fiddle, as it was called,
was regarded by the gentry with profound contempt. Butler, in
"Hudibras," refers to one Jackson, who lost a leg in the service of the
Roundheads, and became a professional "fiddler:"

  "A squeaking engine he apply'd
  Unto his neck, on northeast side,
  Just where the hangman does dispose,
  To special friends, the knot or noose;
  For 'tis great grace, when statesmen straight
  Dispatch a friend, let others wait.

  His grisly beard was long and thick,
  With which he strung his fiddle-stick;
  For he to horse-tail scorned to owe,
  For what on his own chin did grow."

Many years later Purcell, the composer, wrote a catch in which the
merits of a violin maker named Young, and his son, a violin player, are
recorded. The words are as follows:

  "You scrapers that want a good fiddle, well strung,
  You must go to the man that is old while he's Young;
  But if this same Fiddle, you fain would play bold,
  You must go to his son, who'll be Young when he's old.
  There's old Young and young Young, both men of renown,
  Old sells and young plays the best Fiddle in town,
  Young and old live together, and may they live long,
  Young to play an old Fiddle; old to sell a new song."

In the course of time the English learned to esteem all arts more
highly, and in no country was a great musician more sure of a warm
welcome.

Two celebrated violinists were born in the year 1630, Thomas Baltzar,
and John Banister, the former in Germany, at Lubec, and the latter in
London.

Baltzar was esteemed the finest performer of his time, and is said to
have been the first to have introduced the practice of "shifting." In
1656 Baltzar went to England, where he quite eclipsed Davis Mell, a
clockmaker, who was considered a fine player, and did much to give the
violin an impetus toward popularity. The wonder caused by his
performances in England, shortly after his arrival, is best described in
the quaint language of Anthony Wood, who "did, to his very great
astonishment, hear him play on the violin. He then saw him run up his
Fingers to the end of the Fingerboard of the Violin, and run them back
insensibly, and all with alacrity, and in very good tune, which he nor
any in England saw the like before."

At the Restoration Baltzar was appointed leader of the king's celebrated
band of twenty-four violins, but, sad to relate, "Being much admired by
all lovers of musick, his company was therefore desired; and company,
especially musical company, delighting in drinking, made him drink more
than ordinary, which brought him to his grave." And he was buried in the
cloister of Westminster Abbey.

John Banister was taught music by his father, one of the _waits_ of the
parish of St. Giles, and acquiring great proficiency on the violin was
noticed by King Charles II., who sent him to France for improvement. On
his return he was appointed chief of the king's violins. King Charles
was an admirer of everything French, and he appears, according to Pepys,
to have aroused the wrath of Banister by giving prominence to a French
fiddler named Grabu, who is said to have been an "impudent pretender."
Banister lost his place for saying, either to or in the hearing of the
king, that English performers on the violin were superior to those of
France.

John Banister lived in times when fiddle playing was not highly
esteemed, if we may judge by the following ordinance, made in 1658: "And
be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, commonly called Fiddlers, or minstrels, shall at any time after
the said first day of July be taken playing, Fiddling, or making music
in any inn, alehouse, or tavern or shall be proffering themselves, or
desiring, or entreating any person or persons to hear them play ...
shall be adjudged ... rogues, vagabonds, and sturdy beggars."

John Banister seems to have been a somewhat "sturdy beggar," though not
exactly in the sense meant by the ordinance, for he established regular
concerts at his house, "now called the Musick-school, over against the
George Tavern in Whitefriars." These concerts began in 1672, and
continued till near his death, which occurred in 1679. He too, was
buried in the cloister of Westminster Abbey. His son, also, was an
excellent performer on the violin, and played first violin in the
Italian opera when it was first introduced into England. He was one of
the musicians of Charles II., James II., William and Mary, and of Queen
Anne.

Henry Eccles, who lived about the end of the seventeenth century, went
to France, where he became a member of the king's band, and William
Corbett, who went to Italy to study the violin in 1710, was a player of
much ability; but one of the most eminent of English violinists was
Matthew Dubourg, born 1703, who played at a concert when he was so small
that he was placed on a stool in order that he might be seen. At eleven
years of age he was placed under Geminiani, who had recently established
himself in London. Dubourg was appointed, in 1728, Master and Composer
of State-Music in Ireland, and on the death of Festing, in 1752, he
became leader of the king's band in London, and held both posts until
his death in 1767.

An amusing incident is related of Dubourg and Handel. The latter visited
Dublin and presided at a performance of the "Messiah." A few evenings
later, Dubourg, who was leader of the band at the Theatre, had to
improvise a "close," and wandered about in a fit of abstract modulation
for so long that he forgot the original key. At last, however, after a
protracted shake, he landed safely on the key-note, when Handel called
out in a voice loud enough to be heard in the remotest parts of the
theatre, "Welcome home, welcome home, Mr. Dubourg."

Dubourg's name is the first on record in connection with the
performance of a concerto in an English theatre.

John Clegg, a pupil of Dubourg, was a violinist of great ability, whom
Handel placed at the head of the opera band, but his faculties became
deranged by intense study and practice, and he died at a comparatively
early age, in 1742, an inmate of Bedlam.

Another very promising young English violinist was Thomas Linley, who
exhibited great musical powers, and performed a concerto in public when
eight years old. He was sent to Italy to study under Nardini, and
through the mediation of that artist he became acquainted with Mozart,
who was about the same age. Linley's career was prematurely closed, for
at the age of twenty-two he was drowned through the capsizing of a
pleasure-boat.

This completes the list of English violinists of note who were born
previous to the nineteenth century. The later ones we shall find in
their place in succeeding chapters, but there have been very few
violinists of English birth who have followed the career of the
"virtuoso." Even Antonio James Oury, who made a series of concert tours
lasting nine years, during which he occasionally appeared in conjunction
with De Bériot and Malibran, is hardly known as a "virtuoso," and was
not all English. But there are pathetic circumstances in regard to the
career of Oury. He was the son of an Italian of noble descent, who had
served as an officer in the army of Napoleon, and had been taken
prisoner by the English. Making the best of his misfortunes the elder
Oury settled in England, married a Miss Hughes, and became a professor
of dancing and music.

The son, Antonio, began to learn the violin at the age of three, in
which he was a year or two ahead of the average virtuoso, and he made
great progress. By and by he heard Spohr, and after that his diligence
increased, for he practised, during seven months, not less than fourteen
hours a day. Even Paganini used to sink exhausted after ten hours'
practice. In 1820, we are told, he went to Paris and studied under
Baillot, Kreutzer, and Lafont, receiving from each two lessons a week
for several successive winters. With such an imposing array of talent at
his service much might be expected of Mr. Oury, and he actually made his
début at the Philharmonic concerts in London.

There was another unfortunate officer of Napoleon who became tutor to
the Princesses of Bavaria. His name was Belleville. Mr. Oury met his
daughter, and, there being naturally a bond of sympathy between them,
they married. She was an amiable and accomplished pianist, and together
they made the nine years' concert tour.

During the period in which the art of violin playing was being perfected
on the Continent, the English were too fully occupied with commercial
pursuits to foster and develop the art. Up to the present day the most
eminent virtuoso is commonly spoken of as a "fiddler." Even Joachim,
when he went to a barber's shop in High Street, Kensington, and declined
to accept the advice of the tonsorial artist, and have his hair cropped
short, was warned that "he'd look like one o' them there fiddler chaps."
The barber apparently had no greater estimation of the violinist's art
than the latter had of the tonsorial profession, and the situation was
sufficiently ludicrous to form the subject of a picture in _Punch_, and
thus the matter assumed a serious aspect.

England has not been the home of any particular school of violin
playing, but has received her stimulus from Continental schools, to
which her sons have gone to study, and from which many eminent
violinists have been imported.

The word "school," so frequently used in connection with the art of
violin playing, seems to lead to confusion. The Italian school,
established by Corelli, appears to have been the only original school.
Its pupils scattered to various parts of Europe, and there established
other schools. To illustrate this statement, we will follow in a direct
line from Corelli, according to the table given in Grove's Dictionary.

The pupils of Corelli were Somis, Locatelli, Geminiani (Italians), and
Anêt (a Frenchman), whose pupil Senaillé was also French. The greatest
pupil of Somis was Pugnani, an Italian, and his greatest pupil was
Viotti, a Piedmontese, who founded the French school, and from him came
Roberrechts, his pupil De Bériot and his pupil Vieuxtemps, the two
latter Belgians, also Baillot, etc., down to Marsick and Sarasate, a
Spaniard, while through Rode, a Frenchman, we have Böhm (school of
Vienna) and his pupil Joachim, a Hungarian (school of Berlin).

Several violinists are found under two schools, as for instance,
Pugnani, who was first a pupil of Tartini and later of Somis, and Teresa
Milanollo, pupil of Lafont and of De Bériot, who appear under different
schools.

The only conclusion to be drawn is that the greatest violinists were
really independent of any school, and, by their own genius, broke loose
from tradition and established schools of their own. Some of them, on
the other hand, had but few pupils, as for instance, Paganini, who had
but two, and Sarasate. Many also were teachers rather than performers.
We have to deal chiefly with the virtuosi.




CHAPTER II.

1650 TO 1750.


Arcangelo Corelli, whose name is recognised as one of the greatest in
the history of violin playing and composition, and who laid the
foundation for all future development of technique, was born in 1653, at
Fusignano, near Imola, in the territory of Bologna.

He showed an early propensity for the violin, and studied under Bassani,
a man of extensive knowledge and capabilities, while Mattei Simonelli
was his instructor in counterpoint.

Corelli at one time sought fame away from home, and he is said to have
visited Paris, where Lulli, the chief violinist of that city,
exhibited such jealousy and violence that the mild-tempered Corelli
withdrew. In 1680 he went to Germany, where he was well received, and
entered the service of the Elector of Bavaria, but he soon returned to
Rome. His proficiency had now become so great that his fame extended
throughout Europe, and pupils flocked to him. His playing was
characterised by refined taste and elegance, and by a firm and even
tone.

[Illustration: ARCHANGE CORELLI]

When the opera was well established in Rome, about 1690, Corelli led the
band. His chief patron in Rome was Cardinal Ottoboni, and it was at his
house that an incident occurred which places Corelli at the head of
those musicians who have from time to time boldly maintained the rights
of music against conversation. He was playing a solo when he noticed the
cardinal engaged in conversation with another person. He immediately
laid down his violin, and, on being asked the reason, answered that "he
feared the music might interrupt the conversation."

Corelli was a man of gentle disposition and simple habits. His plainness
of dress and freedom from ostentation gave the impression that he was
parsimonious, and Handel says of him that "he liked nothing better than
seeing pictures without paying for it, and saving money," He was also
noted for his objection to riding in carriages.

He lived on terms of intimacy with the leading artists of his time, and
had a great fondness for pictures, of which he had a valuable
collection. These he left at his death to Cardinal Ottoboni.

It was at Cardinal Ottoboni's that Corelli became acquainted with
Handel, and at one of the musical evenings there a "Serenata," written
by the latter, was performed. Corelli does not seem to have played it
according to the ideas of the composer, for Handel, giving way to his
impetuous temper, snatched the fiddle out of Correlli's hand. Corelli
mildly remarked, "My dear Saxon, this music is in the French style, with
which I am not acquainted."

For many years Corelli remained at Rome, but at last he yielded to
temptation and went to Naples, where Scarlatti induced him to play some
of his concertos before the king. This he did in great fear, for he had
not his own orchestra with him. He found Scarlatti's musicians able to
play at first sight as well as his own did after rehearsals, and, the
performance going off well, he was again admitted to play, this time one
of his sonatas, in the royal presence. The king found the adagio so long
and dry that he quitted the room, much to Corelli's mortification. But
greater trouble was in store for the virtuoso. Scarlatti had written a
masque, which was to be played before the king, but owing to the
composer's limited knowledge of the violin, Corelli's part was very
awkward and difficult, and he failed to execute it, while the Neapolitan
violinists played it with ease. To make matters worse, Corelli made an
unfortunate mistake in the next piece, which was written in the key of C
minor, and led off in C major. The mistake was repeated, and Scarlatti
had to call out to him to set him right. His mortification was so great
that he quietly left Naples and returned to Rome. He found here a new
violinist, Valentini, who had won the admiration of the people, and he
took it so much to heart that his health failed, and he died in January,
1713.

Corelli was buried in princely style in the Pantheon, not far from
Raphael's tomb, and Cardinal Ottoboni erected a monument over his grave.
During many years after his death a solemn service, consisting of
selections from his own works, was performed in the Pantheon on the
anniversary of his funeral. On this occasion, the works were performed
in a slow, firm, and distinct manner, just as they were written, without
changing the passages in the way of embellishment, and this is probably
the way in which he himself played them.

Corelli's compositions are remarkable for delicate taste and pleasing
melodies and harmonies. He must be considered as the author of the
greatest improvement which violin music underwent at the beginning of
the eighteenth century. These compositions are regarded as invaluable
for the instruction of young players, and some of them may be frequently
heard in the concert-room at the present day, two hundred years since
they were written. Corelli's most celebrated pupils, Somis, Locatelli,
Geminiani, and Anêt, settled respectively in Italy, Holland, England,
and Poland.

Giovanni Battista Somis was born in Piedmont, and, after studying under
Corelli, he went to Venice and studied under Vivaldi. He was appointed
solo violinist to the king at Turin and leader of the royal band, and
seems scarcely ever to have left Turin after these appointments. Little
is known of his playing or his compositions, but, by the work of his
pupils, it is evident that he possessed originality. He formed a style
more brilliant and more emotional, and caused a decided step forward in
the art of violin playing. He was the teacher of Leclair, Giardini, and
Chiabran, as well as Pugnani, and he forms a connecting link between the
classical schools of Italy and France.

Pietro Locatelli was born at Bergamo, and became a pupil of Corelli at a
very early age. He travelled considerably, and was undoubtedly a great
and original virtuoso. He has been accused of charlatanism, inasmuch as
he overstepped all reasonable limits in his endeavours to enlarge the
powers of execution of the violin, and has, on that account, been
called the grandfather of our modern "finger-heroes."

Locatelli settled in Amsterdam, where he died in 1764. There he
established regular public concerts, and he left a number of
compositions, some of which are used at the present day.

Jean Baptiste Lulli, one of the earliest violinists in France, is
perhaps associated with the violin in a manner disproportionate to the
part he actually played in its progress. He was a musician of great
ability, and his compositions are occasionally heard even to this day.
Lulli was born near Florence about 1633. When quite young he was taken
to France by the Chevalier de Guise, and entered the service of Mlle. de
Montpensier. He was employed in the kitchen, where he seems to have
lightened his burdens by playing tricks on the cook and tunes on the
stewpans. He also beguiled his leisure hours by playing the violin, in
which art he made such progress that the princess engaged a regular
instructor for him. Fortunately, as it turned out, his wit led him into
composing a satirical song on his employer, and he was sent off, but
shortly afterwards secured a post as one of the king's violinists in the
celebrated band of the twenty-four violins. Soon after this a special
band called _Les Petits Violons_ was formed with Lulli at their head,
and under his direction it surpassed the band of twenty-four.

Lulli found great favour at court, and, indeed, astonished the world
with his exquisite taste and skill. That he was firmly established in
the favour of the king is shown by the story that, when Corelli came to
France and played one of his sonatas, King Louis listened without
showing any sign of pleasure, and, sending for one of his own
violinists, requested him to play an aria from Lulli's opera of "Cadmus
et Hermione," which, he declared, suited his taste.

There is little doubt that the principles of the great Italian school
of violin playing were, some years later, brought into France by Anêt,
who was born in 1680, and returned from Italy about 1700, but owing to
the jealousies of his colleagues, he found it advisable to leave France
in a short time, and he is said to have spent the rest of his life as
conductor of the private band of a nobleman in Poland.

Lulli is said to have been very avaricious, and his wealth included four
houses, all in the best quarters of Paris, together with securities and
appointments worth about $70,000. His death, in 1687, was caused by a
peculiar accident. While conducting a performance of his orchestra he
struck his foot with the cane which he used for marking the time. The
bruise gradually assumed such a serious condition that it ended his
life.

Jean Baptiste Senaillé, who was a pupil of Anêt, was born in 1687, and
turned to the Italian school. In 1719 he entered the service of the Duke
of Orleans.

Francesco Geminiani was considered the ablest of the pupils of Corelli,
and was born about 1680. When about twenty-four years of age he went to
England, where his talent secured a great reputation for him, some
people even declaring him to be superior, as a player, to Corelli. He
lived to an advanced age, and was in Dublin visiting his pupil Dubourg
at the time of his death. He was a man of unsettled habits, and was
frequently in dire necessity, caused chiefly by his love of pictures,
which led him into unwise purchases, and thus frequently into debt.

About the year 1650 three violinists were born in Italy, who all left
their mark upon the history of violin playing.

Tommaso Vitali was born at Bologna, and was leader of the orchestra in
that city, and later in Modena.

Giuseppe Torelli was leader of a church orchestra in Bologna, and
afterwards accepted the post of leader of the band of the Markgraf of
Brandenburg-Anspach, at Anspach, in Germany. To him is generally
ascribed the invention of the "Concerto."

Antonio Vivaldi was the son of a violinist, and sought his fortune in
Germany, but returned to his native city in 1713. He wrote extensively
for the violin, and is said to have added something to the development
of its technique. An anecdote is told of him to the effect that one day
during mass a theme for a fugue struck him. He immediately quitted the
altar at which he was officiating, for he united clerical with musical
duties, and, hastening to the sacristy to write down the theme,
afterwards returned and finished the mass. For this he was brought
before the Inquisition, but being considered only as a "musician," a
term synonymous with "madman," the sentence was mild,--he was forbidden
to say mass in the future.

The most illustrious pupil of Vivaldi was Francesco Maria Veracini, who
was born about 1685. He is said to have been a teacher of Tartini, who,
if he did not actually receive instruction from him, at least profited
by his example.

Veracini's travels were extensive, for he visited London in 1714 and
remained there two years, during which time he was very successful. He
then went to Dresden, where he was made composer and chamber virtuoso to
the King of Poland.

While in Dresden he threw himself out of a window and broke his leg, an
injury from which he never entirely recovered. This act is said to have
been caused by his mortification at a trick which was played upon him
for his humiliation by Pisendel, an eminent violinist, but this story is
discredited by some of the best authorities.

He left Dresden and went to Prague, where he entered the service of
Count Kinsky. In 1736 he again visited London, but met with little
success, owing to the fact that Geminiani had ingratiated himself with
the public. In 1847 Veracini returned to Pisa.

Veracini has been sometimes ranked with Tartini as a performer. He was
also a composer of ability. In making a comparison of him with Geminiani
it has been said that Geminiani was the spirit of Corelli much diluted,
while Veracini was the essence of the great master fortified with _l'eau
de vie_.

Veracini was conceited and vainglorious, and these traits of his
character have given rise to a number of rather inconsequential stories.
He was a most excellent conductor of orchestra, and Doctor Burney
mentions having heard him lead a band in such a bold and masterly manner
as he had never before witnessed. Soon after leaving London Veracini was
shipwrecked, and lost his two Stainer violins, which he stated were the
best in the world. These instruments he named St. Peter and St. Paul.

The name of Giuseppe Tartini will ever live as that of one of the
greatest performers on, and composers for, the violin. Born at Pirano,
in 1692, his career may be said to have commenced with the eighteenth
century. He was not only one of the greatest violinists of all time, and
an eminent composer, but he was a scientific writer on musical physics,
and was the first to discover the fact that, in playing double stops,
their accuracy can be determined by the production of a third sound. He
also wrote a little work on the execution and employment of the various
kinds of shakes, mordents, cadenzas, etc., according to the usage of the
classical Italian school.

Tartini's father, who was an elected Nobile of Parenzo, being a pious
Church benefactor, intended his son for the Church, and sent him to an
ecclesiastical school at Capo d'Istria, where he received his first
instruction in music. Finding himself very much averse to an
ecclesiastical career, Tartini entered the University of Padua to study
law, but this also proved distasteful to him. He was a youth of highly
impulsive temperament, and became so much enamoured of the art of
fencing that he, at one time, seriously contemplated adopting it as a
profession. This very impulsive nature caused him to fall in love with a
niece of the Archbishop of Padua, to whom he was secretly married before
he was twenty years of age.

The news of this marriage caused Tartini's parents to withdraw their
support from him, and it so enraged the archbishop that the bridegroom
was obliged to fly from Padua. After some wanderings he was received
into a monastery at Assisi, of which a relative was an inmate. Here he
resumed his musical studies, but though he learned composition of Padre
Boemo, the organist of the monastery, he was his own teacher on the
violin. The influence of the quiet monastic life caused a complete
change in his character, and he acquired the modesty of manner and
serenity of mind for which he was noted later in life.

One day, during the service, a gust of wind blew aside the curtain
behind which Tartini was playing, and a Paduan, who remembered the
archbishop's wrath and recognised the object of it, carried the news of
his discovery to the worthy prelate. Time had, however, mollified him,
and instead of still further persecuting the refugee, he gave his
consent to the union of the young couple, and Tartini and his wife went
to Venice, where he intended to follow the profession of a violinist.

Here he met and heard Francesco Maria Veracini, who was some seven years
his senior, and whose style of playing made such a deep impression on
him that he at once withdrew to Ancona, to correct the errors of his own
technique, which, as he was self-taught, were not a few.

After some years of study and retirement, he reappeared at Padua, where
he was appointed solo violinist in the chapel of San Antonio, the choir
and orchestra of which already enjoyed a high reputation. It is said
that the performance of Veracini had an effect upon Tartini beyond that
of causing him to quit Venice. It made him dream, and the dream as told
by Tartini himself to M. de Lalande is as follows:

"He dreamed one night (in 1713) that he had made a compact with the
devil, who promised to be at his service on all occasions; and, during
this vision, everything succeeded according to his mind; his wishes were
anticipated, and his desires always surpassed, by the assistance of his
new servant. In short, he imagined that he presented the devil with his
violin, in order to discover what kind of a musician he was, when, to
his great astonishment, he heard him play a solo so singularly
beautiful, which he executed with such superior taste and precision,
that it surpassed all the music he had ever heard or conceived in his
life. So great was his surprise, and so exquisite his delight upon this
occasion, that it deprived him of the power of breathing. He awoke with
the violence of his sensations, and instantly seized his fiddle in hopes
of expressing what he had just heard; but in vain. He, however, directly
composed a piece, which is perhaps the best of all his works, and called
it the 'Devil's Sonata;' he knew it, however, to be so inferior to what
his sleep had produced, that he stated he would have broken his
instrument, and abandoned music for ever, if he could have subsisted by
other means."

This composition is said to have secured for him the position in the
chapel of San Antonio, where he remained until 1723, in which year he
was invited to play at the coronation festivities of Charles VI. at
Prague. On this occasion he met Count Kinsky, a rich and enthusiastic
amateur, who kept an excellent private orchestra. Tartini was engaged as
conductor and remained in that position three years, then returning to
his old post at Padua, from which nothing induced him to part, except
for brief intervals. At Padua Tartini carried on the chief work of his
life and established the Paduan school of violin playing. His ability as
a teacher is proved by the large number of excellent pupils he formed.
Nardini, Bini, Manfredi, Ferrari, Graun, and Lahoussaye are among the
most eminent, and were attached to him by bonds of most intimate
friendship to his life's end.

Tartini's contemporaries all agree in crediting him with those
qualities which make a great player. He had a fine tone, unlimited
command of finger-board and bow, enabling him to overcome the greatest
difficulties with remarkable ease, perfect intonation in double stops,
and a most brilliant shake and double-shake, which he executed equally
well with all fingers. The spirit of rivalry had no place in his amiable
and gentle disposition. Both as a player and composer Tartini was the
true successor of Corelli, representing in both respects the next step
in the development of the art.

Tartini lived until the year 1770. He had, as Doctor Burney says, "no
other children than his scholars, of whom his care was constantly
paternal," Nardini, his first and favourite pupil, came from Leghorn to
see him in his sickness and attend him in his last moments with true
filial affection and tenderness. He was buried in the Church of St.
Catharine, a solemn requiem being held in the chapel of San Antonio,
and at a later period his memory was honoured by a statue which was
erected in the Prato della Valle, a public walk at Padua, where it may
be seen among the statues of the most eminent men connected with that
famous university.

Jean Marie Leclair, a pupil of Somis, was a Frenchman, born at Lyons,
and he began life as a dancer at the Rouen Theatre. He went to Turin as
ballet master and met Somis, who induced him to take up the violin and
apply himself to serious study. On returning to Paris, he was appointed
ripieno-violinist at the Opéra, and in 1731 became a member of the royal
band, but he, although undoubtedly superior to any violinist in Paris at
that time, never seems to have made much of a success, for he resigned
his positions and occupied himself exclusively with teaching and
composition, and it is on the merits of his works that he occupies a
high place among the great classical masters of the violin. Leclair was
murdered late one night close to the door of his own house, shortly
after his return from Amsterdam, to which place he had gone solely for
the purpose of hearing Locatelli. No motive for the crime was ever
discovered, nor was the murderer found.

Gaetano Pugnani was a native of Turin, and to him more than to any other
master is due the preservation of the pure, grand style of Corelli,
Tartini, and Vivaldi, for he combined the prominent qualities of style
and technique of all three. He became first violin to the Sardinian
court in 1752, but travelled extensively. He made long stays in Paris
and London, where he was for a time leader of the opera band, and
produced an opera of his own, also publishing a number of his
compositions. In 1770 he was at Turin, where he remained to the end of
his life as teacher, conductor, and composer.

Felice Giardini, another pupil of Somis, was born at Turin and became
one of the foremost violinists in Europe. In 1750 he went to England
where he made his first appearance at a benefit concert for Cuzzoni, the
celebrated opera singer, then in the sere and yellow leaf of her career.
His performance was so brilliant that he became established as the best
violinist who had yet appeared in England, and in 1754 he was placed at
the head of the opera orchestra, succeeding Festing. Soon afterwards he
joined with the singer Mingotti in the management of opera, but the
attempt was not a financial success. Notwithstanding his excellence as a
performer and composer and the fine appointment which he held, Giardini
died in abject poverty at Moscow, to which place he had gone after
finding himself superseded in England by newcomers.

Among the pupils of Tartini the most eminent was Pietro Nardini, who was
born at Fibiano, a village of Tuscany, in 1722. He became solo violinist
at the court of Stuttgart and remained there fifteen years. In 1767 he
went to Leghorn for a short time, and then returned to Padua, where he
remained with his old master Tartini until the latter's death, when he
was appointed director of music to the court of the Duke of Tuscany, in
whose service he remained many years.

Of his playing, Leopold Mozart, himself an eminent violinist, writes:
"The beauty, purity and equality of his tone, and the tastefulness of
his cantabile playing, cannot be surpassed; but he does not execute
great difficulties." His compositions are marked by vivacity, grace, and
sweet sentimentality, but he has neither the depth of feeling, the grand
pathos, nor the concentrated energy of his master Tartini.

Antonio Lolli, who was born at Bergamo about 1730, appears to have been
somewhat of a charlatan. He was self-taught, and, though a performer of
a good deal of brilliancy, was but a poor musician. He was restless,
vain, and conceited, and addicted to gambling. He is said to have played
the most difficult double-stops, octaves, tenths, double-shakes in
thirds and sixths, harmonics, etc., with the greatest ease and
certainty. At one time he appeared as a rival of Nardini, with whom he
is said to have had a contest, and whom he is supposed to have defeated.
According to some accounts, he managed to excite such universal
admiration in advance of the contest that Nardini withdrew.

Lolli was so eccentric that he was considered by many people to be
insane, and Doctor Burney, in writing of him, says, "I am convinced that
in his lucid intervals, he was in a serious style a very great,
expressive, and admirable performer;" but Doctor Burney does not mention
any lucid interval.

Early in the eighteenth century Franz Benda was born in Bohemia at the
village of Altbenatky, and Benda became the founder of a German school
of violin playing. In his youth he was a chorister at Prague and
afterward in the Chapel Royal at Dresden. At the same time he began to
study the violin, and soon joined a company of strolling musicians who
attended fêtes, fairs, etc. At eighteen years of age Benda abandoned
this wandering life and returned to Prague, going thence to Vienna,
where he pursued his study of the violin under Graun, a pupil of
Tartini. After two years he was appointed chapel master at Warsaw, and
eventually he became a member of the Prince Royal of Prussia's band, and
then concert master to the king.

Benda was a master of all the difficulties of violin playing, and the
rapidity of his execution and the mellow sweetness of his highest notes
were unequalled. He had many pupils and wrote a number of works, chiefly
exercises and studies for the violin.

A violinist whose career had a great influence on musical life in
England was Johann Peter Salomon, a pupil of Benda, and it is necessary
to speak of him because his name is so frequently mentioned in
connection with other artists during the latter half of the eighteenth
century.

Salomon was born at Bonn in the same house in which Beethoven was born,
and of Salomon, after his death, Beethoven wrote: "Salomon's death
grieves me much, for he was a noble man, and I remember him ever since I
was a child."

Salomon became an expert violinist at an early age, and travelled a good
deal in Europe before he settled in England, which was in 1781, when he
made his appearance at Covent Garden Theatre. He was criticised thus:
"He does not play in the most graceful style, it must be confessed, but
his tone and execution are such as cannot fail to secure him a number of
admirers in the musical world."

He established a series of subscription concerts at the Hanover Square
rooms, and produced symphonies of Mozart and Haydn. In fact, he was
connected with almost every celebrity who appeared in England for many
years. He was instrumental in bringing Haydn to England, and toward the
end of his career he was actively interested in the foundation of the
Philharmonic Society. He was noted more as a quartet player than as a
soloist, and Haydn's last quartets were composed especially to suit his
style of playing. He was a man of much cultivation and moved in
distinguished society. His death was caused by a fall from his horse. He
was the possessor of a Stradivarius violin which was said to have
belonged to Corelli and to have had his name upon it. This he bequeathed
to Sir Patrick Blake of Bury St. Edmunds.





made his first appearance in 1897, at the Queen's Hall Symphony
concerts.

M. Gregorowitsch is remarkable for a large tone, and in the smoothness
and finish of his playing he has been compared with Sauret and with
Sarasate.

A far greater sensation was caused in America by Willie Burmester than
by Gregorowitsch.

Burmester was born in Hamburg in 1869, and received his first
instruction from his father. He owned his first violin when he was four
years of age, and it came to him from a Christmas tree. This served to
show the talent which he possessed, and the next year he received a
better violin, and began to study in earnest.

When he was eight years old his father took him to Berlin to consult
Joachim, who was, and is, regarded as the oracle for violinists. Joachim
gave some encouragement to the parent, although he does not seem to have
given much to the boy, who in consequence felt somewhat bitter. Four
years later he was again taken to the Berlin Hochschule, to pass his
entrance examination. On this occasion he received the recognition of
the jury, and was admitted to the school, where he began a rigorous
course of technical study. At the end of four years' study under Joachim
he was refused a certificate, for some reason not stated, and he went to
Helsingfors in Finland, where he worked according to his own ideas,
which were to unlearn all he had studied, and begin afresh. During this
period he worked with the greatest perseverance, practising nine or ten
hours a day, and thus developed the wonderful technique which has
astonished the world. For three years he continued this work, supporting
himself meanwhile with a modest appointment which he had obtained.

Before he left Berlin he had worn down the end of his first finger to
the nerve. This troubled him to such a degree that he had several
operations for the purpose of removing it, but the result was not wholly
satisfactory.

Emerging from his retirement in 1894, he went to Berlin again, and gave
a recital in which he met with the most remarkable success. It was
written at the time: "Mr. Burmester comes from an obscure town,
unheralded, and, in the face of indifference, prejudice, and jealousy,
conquered the metropolis off-hand. For nearly half an hour recall
followed recall."

The following season he created an equal impression in London, and
shortly afterward in America.

His technique has been described as "marvellous, almost diabolical."
Difficult pizzicato passages and runs in thirds and tenths at top speed
are but as child's play to him. His left hand pizzicato is marvellous,
and he makes runs in single and artificial harmonics as quickly as most
violinists can play an ordinary scale. He plays harmonics with a vibrato
(Paganini played a double shake in harmonics), and his staccato volante
is developed to an astounding degree of perfection.

When Burmester played in London his success was at once attributed to
Joachim, and he resented it, in view of the fact that he had been denied
his certificate and had narrowly escaped musical suffocation at the
hands of that great master. He had already made the same statement in
Berlin, referring to the fact of his retirement to Helsingfors, and the
development which he had acquired there in solitude.

This announcement brought forth a deluge of letters from "pupils of
Joachim," and in a couple of weeks Burmester wrote another letter
stating that he did not know the Hochschule had as many pupils as those
who had claimed Joachim as their teacher, and who were all unknown. "If
one known pupil of Joachim," he wrote, "will appoint a meeting to
interview me on the subject, I shall be glad to continue it." But the
one known pupil did not come.

The complaint of Mr. Burmester, that the one idea at the Hochschule is
technique, is not new by any means. In every school there are students
with great talent, who find it difficult to subject themselves to the
rigid discipline required by the teacher. It is the stumbling-block on
which many fall. It is, nevertheless, a fact that without a solid
technique the highest perfection in playing cannot be reached, and it is
usually regarded as a hopeless case when the pupil antagonises the
teacher. Many pupils are apt to try and run ahead of their technical
ability, and do not find out their mistake until it is too late. The
argument that Paganini was self-taught leads many a young violinist into
error.

If Burmester is to be judged by his playing of the Beethoven concerto in
Boston, good musicians will declare that Joachim was right in refusing
the certificate, for while his technique was brilliant it appeared to
lack foundation. Time may justify the stand which the young virtuoso has
taken in opposition to his teacher, for he is still young and has time
in which to develop. He has undoubted musical talent and great ability,
but while he may be a celebrated violinist he can hardly yet be
considered a great one, notwithstanding the furore which he caused in
Berlin.

Burmester plays with unassuming simplicity and without cheap display. He
is sincere, but without authority or distinction of style. His tone is
warm and pleasing, but not large, his intonation is not always sure.

One of Burmester's earliest musical friends was Hans Von Bülow, and the
friendship extended over a period of three and a half years, until Von
Bülow went to Cairo shortly before his death.

Von Bülow had inaugurated a series of orchestral concerts in Berlin, and
as they interfered with the Philharmonic series every effort was made to
put a stop to them. Musicians were forbidden to play for Von Büllow,
and many obstacles were placed in his way. Von Büllow's temperament was
such as to intensify the hostility rather than succumb to it. Burmester
was then only sixteen years old, but his sympathy was with Von Büllow,
and he wrote a letter to him offering his services, and expressing his
contempt for the injustice to which he was being subjected. Von Büllow
invited him to attend the rehearsals, and printed the letter which he
had received. Burmester accepted the invitation, and, going to the
rehearsal, found vacant a seat amongst the first violins, which he took.

The rehearsal was about to commence when Von Büllow paused and asked,
"Which of you gentlemen is Burmester?"

The young fellow approached Von Büllow, who had motioned him to come.

"Mr. Burmester," he said, "I have no desk in the first row to offer you
or it would be yours. Gentlemen," he added, turning to the musicians,
"I wish to introduce to you the guest of honour of my orchestra, Mr.
Burmester."

This was the beginning of a friendship, through which the young
violinist showed unswerving loyalty, and it is now one of his greatest
desires to reach a point of independence which will enable him to build
a monument to Von Bülow's memory.

In 1893 a sensation was created in America by the visit of Henri
Marteau, a young French violinist whose excellent playing and charming
personality delighted all who heard him. Marteau was called "the
Paderewski of the Catgut," and he met with a most cordial reception
among musicians.

Marteau was born at Reims in 1874. His father was an amateur violinist
and president of the Philharmonic Society of Reims. His mother was an
accomplished pianist, a pupil of Madame Schumann. He therefore had
every advantage in his early youth for the development of musical taste.
When he was about five years of age Sivori paid a visit to the family,
and was so charmed with the little fellow that he gave him a violin, and
persuaded his parents to let him become a professional violinist.
Marteau now began to take lessons of Bunzl, a pupil of Molique, but
three years later he went to Paris, and was placed under Leonard. In
1884, when ten years of age, he played in public before an audience of
2,500 people, and in the following year he was selected by Gounod to
play the obligato of a piece composed for the Joan of Arc Centenary
celebration at Reims, which piece was dedicated to him.

In 1892 Marteau carried off the first prize for violin playing at the
Paris Conservatoire, and Massenet, the celebrated French composer, wrote
a concerto for him.

When Marteau played in Boston at the Symphony concerts he received
twelve recalls, and immediately became the idol of the hour. The
concerto selected was that in G minor by Bruch, and it was played
without a rehearsal, a fact which reflects great credit on the
orchestra, which was at that time conducted by Mr. Arthur Nikisch.

In the following year Marteau again visited America and brought with him
a concerto composed for him by Dubois. This was played for the first
time by the Colonne orchestra, with Marteau as soloist, at Paris, on
November 28, 1894, and again on the following Sunday. It was next given
at Marseilles on December 12th, and the next performances were at
Pittsburg, Louisville, and Nashville during the second American tour.

Marteau's tone is large, brilliant, and penetrating. His technique is
sure, and he plays with contagious warmth of sentiment and great
artistic charm.

The violin which he used during his American tours was a Maggini, which
once belonged to Maria Theresa of Austria. She gave it to a Belgian
musician who had played chamber music with her in Vienna. He took it to
Belgium, where at his death it became the property of Leonard, who, at
his death, gave it to Marteau.

Alexander Petschnikoff, the son of a Russian soldier, is the latest
violinist who has created a furore in Europe. When he was quite young
his parents moved to Moscow, near which city he was born, and one day a
musician of the Royal Opera House happened to hear the boy, who had
already endeavoured to master the difficulties of the instrument, and he
used his influence to get the lad into the conservatory. Petschnikoff
now became a pupil of Hrimaly, and devoted himself to hard work, earning
some money by teaching even at the age of ten.

In due course he won the first prize and the gold medal at the
conservatory, and was then offered an opportunity to study in Paris,
which he declined. For a time he earned his living by playing in a
theatre orchestra, but fortune smiled upon him, and he became an object
of interest to the Princess Ourosoff, who heard him play at a concert.
Her influence was exerted in his behalf, and he was soon noticed and
courted by the nobility. The princess also made him a present of a
magnificent violin, which formerly belonged to Ferdinand Laub, and is
said to be the most costly instrument in existence.

When he made his début in Berlin, in 1895, his success was
unprecedented, inasmuch as it covered four points,--the artistic,
popular, social, and financial. He has created a furore wherever he has
appeared, and has been recalled as many as sixteen times. So great has
been his success that he is said to have received the highest honorarium
for a single concert ever obtained by a violinist in Europe.

He is described as a man of commonplace appearance, with dull,
expressionless eyes, sluggish movements, and slow, affected manner of
speech. His technique is not astonishing, but he has a full,
penetrating, sympathetic tone. There is no charlatanism or trickery in
his playing, nor any virtuoso effects, but the charm of it rests in his
glowing temperament, ideal conception, and wonderful power of
expression. He has been regarded as phenomenal, because he can move the
hearts of his hearers as few other violinists are able to do.

Petschnikoff has been given an introduction to America, through Mr. Emil
Paur, by Theodor Leschetizky, couched in the most glowing terms, and is
called by him "an artist of the very first rank and of inconceivable
versatility."

One might prolong the list of violinists to a tremendous extent, and yet
fail to mention all those of great merit. In England, John Dunn appears
to be acquiring a great reputation. On the Continent, such names as
Hubay, Petri, Rosé are well known. In America, we have Leopold
Lichtenberg, a good musician of admirable qualifications. Bernhard
Listemann, now of Chicago, has done much toward forming musical taste in
America, and was concert-master of the Boston Symphony Orchestra during
the first few years of its existence. But space does not permit of a
mention of more than has been attempted, and a few pages must be given
to lady violinists and to a few words about celebrated quartets.




CHAPTER X.

WOMEN AS VIOLINISTS.


During the past forty or fifty years the violin has become a fashionable
instrument for ladies, and has become correspondingly popular as a
profession for those who are obliged to earn a living.

Formerly, for many years, it seems to have been considered improper, or
ungraceful, or unladylike,--the reasons are nowhere satisfactorily
given, but the fact remains that until recently few women played the
violin.

From the year 1610 until 1810 the list of those who played in public is
extremely short, numbering only about twenty, and of these several were
gambists.

That women did, once upon a time, play on the violin, or the
corresponding string and bow instruments which were its ancestors, there
is evidence.

On the painted roof of Peterborough Cathedral, in England, which is said
to have been built in the year 1194 A.D., there is a picture of a woman
seated, and holding in her lap a sort of viol, with four strings and
four sound-holes. This seems to indicate that in very early days ladies
sometimes played on stringed instruments, if only for their own
amusement.

Among the accounts of King Henry VII., dated November 2, 1495, is the
following item, "For a womane that singeth with a fiddle, 2 shillings."

Anne of Cleves after her divorce comforted herself by playing on a viol
with six strings. Queen Elizabeth, also, amused herself not only with
the lute, the virginals, and her voice, but also with the violin.

These, however, were amateurs, and the earliest professional violinist
known was Mrs. Sarah Ottey, who was born about 1695, and who about
1721-22 performed frequently at concerts, giving solos on the
harpsichord, violin, and bass viol. Previous to her there was one
Signora Leonora Baroni, born at Mantua about 1610, but she played the
theorbo and the viol di gamba.

The next is "La Diamantina," born about 1715, who is referred to by the
poet Gray in 1740, when he was at Rome, as "a famous virtuosa, played on
the violin divinely, and sung angelically."

Anne Nicholl, born in England about 1728, played the violin before the
Duke of Cumberland at Huntley in 1746, and her granddaughter, Mary Anne
Paton, also, who was better known as a singer and who became Lady Lenox,
and afterwards Mrs. Wood, was a violinist.

The celebrated Madame Gertrude Elizabeth Mara, one of the greatest
singers of her time, was a violinist when young. Her father took her to
England, hoping by means of her playing to get sufficient money to give
her a thorough musical education. She was then a mere child, and as she
grew to womanhood her voice developed and she became one of the
celebrities in the history of song. There is no doubt that the training
in intervals which her practice on the violin gave her proved invaluable
as an aid to her in singing. In later days several of the most
celebrated singers have been also good violinists, as, for instance,
Christine Nilsson and Marcella Sembrich.

Maddalena Lombardi Sirmen, born about 1735, had an almost European
reputation toward the end of the eighteenth century. She visited France
and England about 1760-61, and was so good a player that she was looked
upon almost as a rival of Nardini. She will always be celebrated in
history because of the letter which was written to her by Tartini, and
which is not only one of the rarities of musical literature, but
constitutes also a valuable treatise on the use of the violin.

This letter, which has been printed in almost every book on the violin,
would take up rather more space than can be afforded in this sketch. It
is admirably clear and is divided into three parts, the first giving
advice on bowing, "pressing the bow lightly but steadily, upon the
strings in such a manner as that it shall seem to _breathe_ the first
tone it gives, which must proceed from the friction of the string, and
not from percussion, as by a blow given with a hammer upon it,--if the
tone is _begun_ with delicacy, there is little danger of rendering it
afterwards either coarse or harsh." The second section of the letter is
devoted to the finger-board, or the "carriage of the left hand," and the
last part to the "shake."

Maddalena Sirmen received her instruction first at the conservatory of
Mendicanti at Venice, after which she took lessons from Tartini. She
also composed a considerable quantity of violin music, much of which was
published at Amsterdam. About 1782 she, emulating the example of Madame
Mara, appeared as a singer at Dresden, but with comparatively small
success.

Regina Sacchi, who married a noted German violoncellist named Schlick,
was celebrated for her performances on the violin. She was born at
Mantua in 1764, and educated at the Conservatorio della Pietà at Venice.
This lady was highly esteemed by Mozart, who said of her, "No human
being can play with more feeling."

When Mozart was in Vienna, about 1786, Madame Schlick was also there,
and solicited him to write something for the piano and violin, which
they should play together at a concert. Mozart willingly promised to do
so, and accordingly composed and arranged, _in his mind_, his beautiful
sonata in B-flat minor, for piano and violin. The time for the concert
drew near, but not a note was put upon paper, and Madame Schlick's
anxiety became painful. Eventually, after much entreaty, she received
the manuscript of the violin part the evening before the concert, and
set herself to work to study it, taking scarcely any rest that night.

The sonata was played before an audience consisting of the rank and
fashion of Vienna. The execution of the two artists was perfect and the
applause was enthusiastic. It happened, however, that the Emperor Joseph
II., who was seated in a box just above the performers, in using his
opera-glass to look at Mozart, noticed that there was nothing on his
desk but a sheet of blank paper, and, afterward calling the composer to
him, said: "So, Mozart, you have once again trusted to chance," to which
Mozart, of course, graciously acquiesced, though the emperor did not
state whether he considered Mozart's knowledge of his new composition,
or Madame Schlick's ability to play with him unrehearsed, constituted
the "chance."

The next virtuosa was a Frenchwoman, Louise Gautherot, who was born
about 1760, and who played in London and made a great impression about
1780 to 1790, and about the same time Signora Vittoria dall' Occa played
at the theatre in Milan. Signora Paravicini, born about 1769, and Luigia
Gerbini, about 1770, were pupils of Viotti, and earned fame. The former
made a sensation in 1799 by her performance of some violin concertos at
the Italian Theatre at Lisbon, where she played between the acts.

Signora Paravicini attracted the attention of the Empress Josephine, who
became her patroness and engaged her to teach her son, Eugene
Beauharnais, and took her to Paris. After a time, however, the Empress
neglected her, and she suffered from poverty. Driven to the last
resource, and having even pawned her clothes, she applied for aid to the
Italians resident in Paris, and they enabled her to return to Milan,
where her ability soon gained her both competence and credit. She also
played at Vienna in 1827, and at Bologna in 1832, where she was much
admired.

Catarina Calcagno, who has already been mentioned as a pupil of
Paganini, was a native of Genoa, born about 1797, and had a short but
brilliant career. She disappeared from before the public in 1816.

Madame Krahmer and Mlles. Eleanora Neumann, and M. Schulz all delighted
the public in Vienna and Prague. Miss Neumann came from Moscow, and
astonished the public when she had scarcely reached her tenth year.
Other names are Madame Filipowicz, Madame Pollini, Mlle. Zerchoff, Eliza
Wallace, and Rosina Collins, who all played publicly and were well
known.

In 1827 Teresa Milanollo was born, and in 1832 her sister Marie, and
these two young ladies played so well, and were in such striking
contrast to one another, that they proved very successful as concert
players. They were natives of Savigliano, in Piedmont, where their
father was a manufacturer of silk-spinning machinery. Teresa, the elder,
was taught by Ferrero, Caldera, and Morra, but in 1836 she went to Paris
and studied under Lafont, and afterwards under Habeneck, going still
later to Brussels, where she took lessons of De Bériot, and received the
finishing touch to her artistic education,--faultless intonation. Her
career as a concert player began when she was about nine years of age.
When Marie was old enough to handle a violin Teresa began to teach her,
and in fact was the only teacher Marie ever had.

The two sisters, who were called, on account of their most striking
characteristics, Mlle. Staccato and Mlle. Adagio, travelled together
through France, Holland, Belgium, Germany, and England, and were
everywhere received with the greatest interest. They played before Louis
Philippe at Neuilly, and appeared with Liszt before the King of Prussia.
They also created a furore at Vienna and Berlin.

Marie, the younger, who was of a happy and cheerful disposition, was not
strong, and in 1848 she died in Paris. Teresa, the elder, after a long
retirement, resumed her travels, and, having matured and improved, she
played better and excited more interest than before. In 1857 she married
a French officer, Captain Théodore Parmentier, who had seen service in
the Crimean War, and she abandoned the concert stage.

From 1857 until 1878 she followed the fortunes of her husband, who
became a general and a "Grand Officier de la Legion d'Honneur," and her
public appearances were limited to such places as the vicissitudes of a
military life took her to. Since 1878 Madame Parmentier has lived
quietly in Paris, where she is still to be met by a few fortunate
persons in select musical and social circles.

During the lifetime of Marie, the sisters had already put themselves
into direct personal relations with the poor of Lyons, but after Teresa
had roused herself from her mourning for her sister she established a
system of "Concerts aux Pauvres," which she carried out in nearly all
the chief cities of France, and part of the receipts of these concerts
was used for the benefit of the poor. Her plan was to follow up the
first concert with a second, at which the audience consisted of poor
school-children and their parents, to whom she played in her most
fascinating manner, and, at the conclusion of her performance, money,
food, and clothing, purchased with the receipts of the previous
concerts, were distributed.

From 1830 there has been a constantly increasing number of ladies who
have appeared as concert violinists, but few have continued long before
the public, or have reached such a point of excellence as to be numbered
amongst the great performers.

Mlle. Emilia Arditi, Fraülein Hortensia Zirges, Miss Hildegard Werner,
Miss Bertha Brousil, and Madame Rosetta Piercy-Feeny were all born
during the decade 1830 to 1840, and were well known, but in 1840 and
1842 two violinists were born who were destined to hold the stage for
many years and to exert a great influence in their profession. Wilma
Neruda, now known as Lady Hallé and Camilla Urso are the two ladies in
question, the former exerting her influence chiefly in England and on
the Continent, and the latter in America.

Miss Werner has played an important part in advancing the art amongst
women, having for many years conducted a school of music at
Newcastle-on-Tyne, in England. She was also the first woman ever to
address the Literary and Philosophical Society, when in 1880 she
delivered an address on the history of the violin. There is little
doubt, however, that the success of Teresa Milanollo gave the first
great impulse toward the study of the violin by women.

Lady Hallé was born at Brünn, March 21, 1840. Her father was Josef
Neruda, a musician of good ability, and he gave her the first
instruction on the violin, and then placed her under Leopold Jansa, in
Vienna. Wilhelmina Maria Franziska Neruda made her first appearance in
public in 1846, at which time she was not quite seven years old. On this
occasion her sister Amalie, who was a pianist, accompanied her, and
shortly afterwards her father took her, with her sister Amalie and one
of her brothers, on an extended tour. The family consisted of two
sons--a pianist and a 'cellist--and two daughters--a violinist and a
pianist.

In 1849 they reached London, where the young violinist played a concerto
by De Bériot, at the seventh Philharmonic concert of that season. By the
critics at that time she was said to be wonderful in bravura music, in
musical intelligence, and in her remarkable accuracy.

As time went on, and her playing matured, she became known throughout
Europe. In 1864 she married Ludwig Norman, conductor of the opera at
Stockholm, and for a time she remained in that city and became a teacher
at the Royal Music School.

Before long she was again busy with concert playing, and in 1869 she
again appeared in England, where she became a great favourite, and has
appeared there regularly almost, if not quite, every season since. Hans
von Bülow spoke of her as Joachim's rival, and called her "the violin
fairy."

Joachim has always been a great favourite in England, but Madame
Norman-Neruda, or Lady Hallé, as she became later, has fully shared his
popularity. What Joachim is to the sterner sex, just the same is Lady
Hallé to the gentler.

Joachim was indeed one of the first to recognise the fact that he had in
Mlle. Neruda a rival, for in the days when she was earning her
reputation he heard her at some place on the Continent, and remarked to
Charles Hallé, who afterwards became her husband, "I recommend this
artist to your careful consideration. Mark this, when people have given
her a fair hearing, they will think more of her and less of me."

Ludwig Norman died in 1885, and three years later Madame Norman-Neruda
married the pianist, Charles Hallé, who had long been identified with
all that was best musically in England, and who was knighted in
recognition of his services to the cause of art.

Sir Charles Hallé established a series of orchestral concerts at
Manchester in 1857, and by means of these concerts brought before the
English public the works of many composers who would have remained
unknown perhaps for years but for his efforts. In this work he was ably
supported by this talented violinist, afterwards his wife, and with her
he made many tours all over the British Isles.

In 1890 Sir Charles and Lady Hallé made a tour in Australia, which was
highly successful. Five years later they went to South Africa, where
they met with a flattering reception. In his memoirs, Sir Charles Hallé
tells of a curious compliment which they received at Pietermaritzburg.
The mayor invited them to play at a municipal concert to be given one
Sunday afternoon. The concert began, and after an organ solo and a song
had been given by other musicians, they played the Kreutzer sonata. At
the conclusion of the sonata, a member of the corporation came forward,
and said that after the impression just received he thought it would be
best to omit the remainder of the programme, upon which the audience
cheered and dispersed.

In 1895, shortly after their return from the South African tour, Sir
Charles Hallé died, and Lady Hallé went into retirement. At this time
her numerous admirers in England presented her with a valuable
testimonial of their appreciation.

Throughout her career she has fulfilled the prophecies made of her in
her youth, for her talent and musicianship developed as she grew up, and
her genius did not burn itself out as that of many infant prodigies has
done. She has never endeavoured to secure public applause at the expense
of her real artistic nature. Her performances are and always have been
synonymous with all that is good in musical art, and nothing but that
which is of the best has ever been allowed to appear upon her
programmes.

She is celebrated no less as a quartet player than as a soloist, and was
for many years first violin of the Philharmonic Quartet in London.

In 1898, Lady Hallé had the misfortune to lose her son, Mr. Norman
Neruda, who, while scaling a difficult place in the Alps, slipped and
was killed.

In the following year she emerged from her retirement and visited the
United States, where her playing was highly appreciated by unbiassed
critics. There was a feeling, however, that she might have made the
journey many years before, and allowed the American public to hear her
in her prime, when she would have received not only a very warm welcome,
but would have been judged rather by her merits than by her history, and
she would not have challenged comparison with the violinists of the
rising generation.

Camilla Urso has been for many years one of the best known violinists in
the United States. She was born at Nantes, in France, in 1842, of
Italian parents. Her father was Salvator Urso, a good musician, and son
of a good musician, so that the young violinist inherited some of her
talent. In 1852 the family crossed the Atlantic and settled in the
United States, and almost immediately the little girl began to appear at
concerts. Camilla Urso began to study the violin at the age of six
years, and her choice of that instrument was determined by her hearing
the violin and being fascinated by it during a celebration of the Mass
of St. Cecilia. She was taken to Paris for instruction, for which
purpose her father abandoned his position at Nantes. She entered the
Conservatoire and became a pupil of Massart.

She made a tour through Germany, during which she met with immense
success, and then returned to Paris to continue her studies.

She was fresh from Massart's instruction when, in October, 1852, she
made her first appearance in Boston, where her playing and her style
called forth eulogies from the critics of those days. John S. Dwight
wrote to the effect that it was one of the most touching experiences of
his life to see and hear the charming little maiden, so natural and
childlike, so full of sentiment and thought, so self-possessed and
graceful. Her tone was pure, and her intonation faultless, and she
played with a "fine and caressing delicacy," and gave out strong
passages in chords with thrilling grandeur.

For three years she continued to travel and delight American audiences,
and then for a period of about five years she retired into private life,
and did not resume her professional career until 1862, from which time
she frequently made concert tours in America until she returned to
Paris. It was about the period of these tours that her influence upon
young women began to be felt, for she was at an age when womanly grace
becomes evident, and her manners and character were as fascinating as
her playing.

In Paris she so pleased M. Pasdeloup that he begged her not to allow
herself to be heard in public until she had played at his concerts. "You
may count upon a splendid triumph," he said. "It is _I_ who tell you so.
Your star is in the ascendant, and soon it will shine at the zenith of
the artistic firmament."

The result justified the prophecy, and Camilla Urso was the recipient of
great honours in Paris. She was presented by the public with a pair of
valuable diamond earrings, and was treated almost like a prima donna.

In March, 1867, Mlle. Urso received a testimonial from the musical
profession in Boston, where a few years later she had a curious
experience. She was playing a Mozart concerto, at a concert, when an
alarm of fire was given, and caused a good deal of excitement. Many of
the audience left their seats and made for the door, but the violinist
stood unmoved until the alarm was subdued and the audience returned to
their seats, when she played the interrupted movement through from the
beginning.

In 1879 she made a tour to Australia, and again in 1894.

In 1895 she was in South Africa, and achieved great triumphs in Cape
Town, besides giving concerts at such out-of-the-way places as
Bloemfontein. She has probably travelled farther than any other violin
virtuosa.

For the past few years she has lived in New York, and has practically
retired from the concert stage.

Teresina Tua, who was well known in the United States about 1887, was
born at Turin in 1867. As in the case of Wilhelmina Neruda and of
Camilla Urso, her father was a musician, and she received her early
musical instruction from him. Her first appearance in public was made at
the age of seven, and up to that time she had received no instruction,
except that given her by her father. During her first tour she played at
Nice, where a wealthy Russian lady, Madame Rosen, became interested in
her, and provided the means to go to Paris, where she was placed under
Massart.

In 1880 Signorina Tua won the first prize for violin playing at the
Paris Conservatoire, and the following year made a concert tour which
extended through France and Spain to Italy. In 1882 she appeared in
Vienna, and in 1883 in London, where she played at the Crystal Palace.
Wherever she went people of wealth and distinction showed the greatest
interest in her, and when she came to America in 1887 she appeared laden
with jewelry given her by royalty. Her list of jewels was given in the
journals of that day,--"a miniature violin and bow ablaze with diamonds,
given by the Prince and Princess of Wales; a double star with a
solitaire pearl in the centre, and each point tipped with pearls, from
Queen Margherita of Italy." Besides these, there were diamonds from the
Queen of Spain and from the Empress of Russia and sundry grand
duchesses. No lady violinist ever appeared before an American audience
more gorgeously arrayed. "Fastened all over the bodice of her soft white
woollen gown she wore these sparkling jewels, and in her hair were two
or three diamond stars," said the account in Dwight's _Journal of
Music_. Yet with all this the criticisms of her playing were somewhat
lukewarm. The expectation of the people had been wrought up to an
unreasonable pitch, and Signorina Tua, while she was acknowledged to be
an excellent and charming violinist, was not considered _great._ After a
time, however, as she became better known, she grew in popular
estimation, and before she left America she had hosts of admirers.

On returning to Europe she made another tour, but shortly afterwards she
married Count Franchi Verney della Valetta, a distinguished Italian
critic, and retired into private life, though from time to time she was
heard in concerts in Italy.

In 1897 she was again on the concert stage, and played at St. James's
Hall, London, after an absence of eight years, and it was considered
that her playing had gained in breadth, while her technique was as
perfect as ever.

Of the three hundred or more pupils of Joachim, there have been several
ladies who have attained celebrity, of whom Miss Emily Shinner (now
Mrs. A. F. Liddell) has been for some years the most prominent in
England, while the names of Gabrielle Wietrowitz and Marie Soldat are
known throughout Europe, and Maude Powell and Leonora Jackson are among
the brightest lights from the United States.

Miss Emily Shinner has been in many respects a pioneer amongst lady
violinists, for in 1874, when quite young, she went to Berlin to study
the violin. In those days pupils of the fair sex were not admitted to
the Hochschule, and Miss Shinner began to study under Herr Jacobsen. It
happened, however, that a lady from Silesia arrived at Berlin, intending
to take lessons of Joachim, but unaware of the rules against the
admission of women to the Hochschule. Joachim interested himself in her,
and she was examined for admission. Miss Shinner at once presented
herself as a second candidate, and the result was that both ladies were
accepted as probationers. In six months Miss Shinner was allowed to
become a pupil of Joachim, and thus gained the distinction of being the
first girl violinist to study under the great professor.

Again in 1884 Miss Shinner, having acquired a great reputation in
musical circles in England, was called upon at very short notice to take
Madame Neruda's place as leader to the "Pop" Quartet, on which occasion
she acquitted herself so well that an encore of the second movement of
the quartet was demanded. Since that time she has been always before the
public, and has taken special interest in chamber music and quartet
playing, the Shinner Quartet of ladies having acquired a national
reputation.

Her marriage to Capt. A. F. Liddell took place in 1889.

Marie Soldat was born at Gratz in 1863 or 1864, and was the daughter of
a musician, who was pianist, organist, and choirmaster, and who gave
her instruction from her fifth year on the piano. Two years later she
began to learn the organ, and was soon able to act as substitute for her
father when occasion required her services. Until her twelfth year she
studied music vigorously, taking violin lessons with Pleiner at the
Steier Musical Union at Gratz, and composition with Thierot, the
Kapellmeister, at the same time keeping on with the pianoforte.

She played the phantasie-caprice by Vieuxtemps in a concert at the
Musical Union when she was ten years of age, and at thirteen she went on
a tour and played Bruch's G minor concerto.

Soon after this she had the misfortune to lose her father, and a little
later her violin teacher, Pleiner, also died, so that her progress
received a check. Joachim, however, visited Gratz to play at a concert,
and the young girl went to him and consulted him as to her future
course. As a result of the interview she began to take lessons of August
Pott, a good violinist at Gratz, and the following year (1879) she again
went on a concert tour, visiting several cities in Austria.

During this tour, she made the acquaintance of Johannes Brahms, who took
a great deal of interest in her, advised her to devote all her energies
to the violin, and succeeded in arranging for another interview with
Joachim, the result of which was that she was enabled to enter the
Berlin High School for Music. Here she pursued her studies until 1882,
after which she still continued her studies and took private lessons of
Joachim.

At the high school she gained the Mendelssohn prize, and from that time
commenced her career as a virtuosa, touring extensively throughout
Europe. One of her greatest triumphs was when, in 1885, at Vienna, she
played Brahm's violin concerto with Richter's orchestra.

Her career has been marked by hard work and continual practice, which
have enabled her to overcome many obstacles, and have placed her on a
level with the very best violinists of her sex.

The Ladies' String Quartet, which she formed in Berlin, consisting of
herself as first violin, with Agnes Tschetchulin, Gabrielle Roy, and
Lucie Campbell, had a creditable career, and appeared in several German
cities.

In 1889 Marie Soldat married a lawyer named Röger, but did not retire
from her profession. She is now known as Madame Soldat-Röger.

Gabrielle Wietrowitz was born a few years later, in 1866, at Laibach,
and was also a pupil at the Musical Institute at Gratz. Her father was a
military bandsman who had some knowledge of the violin, which enabled
him to give his daughter elementary instruction on that instrument.

After a few years he left Laibach to settle in Gratz, and Gabrielle took
violin lessons from A. Geyer (some accounts say Caspar). On entering the
Musical Union she made a sensation by playing brilliantly at a concert
before a large audience. She was then eleven years of age, and from that
time she made the most rapid progress, taking first prize at the annual
trial concert. In consequence of her great promise Count Aichelburg, who
was a member of the Directorate of the Musical Union, presented her with
a valuable violin, and the Directorate assigned her a yearly salary
which enabled her to go to Berlin and enter the high school, where she
became a pupil of Joachim in 1882.

At the high school her career was as brilliant as it had been in Gratz,
for at the end of her first year she succeeded in capturing the
Mendelssohn prize, which brought her 1,500 marks, and at the end of her
third year she took it for a second time.

She remained at the high school three years, after which she began a
splendid career by playing the concerto by Brahms at the St. Cecilia
Festival at Münster. Then followed a series of concert tours, which
resulted in securing her a reputation as one of the most brilliant stars
amongst women.

Miss Wietrowitz plays with the most consummate ease the greatest works
of the modern school. She has a powerful and brilliant tone, with sweet
tenderness and sympathy, which appeal to the soul of the listener, and
she confines her repertoire to the highest class of musical
compositions. She has recently succeeded Miss Emily Shinner as first
violin in the quartet which that talented lady established in England.

The most recent star of Europe is Madame Saenger-Sethe, whose
appearances are invariably followed by eulogies from the critics. In
Berlin, when she appeared at the Singakademie, in November, 1898, where
she was assisted by the Philharmonic Orchestra, one critic declared that
no violin playing had been heard to compare with it during that season,
with the exception of Burmester's performance of the Beethoven concerto.
"Such wealth and sensuous beauty of tone, such certainty of technique,
such mental grasp of the work, and at the same time such all-conquering
temperament have not been heard in Berlin at the hands of a female
violinist during several years." After many recalls, she gave, as an
encore, a rousing performance of a Bach sarabande.

Mlle. Irma Sethe was born on April 28, 1876, at Brussels, and such was
her early aptitude for music that at the age of five she was placed
under a violinist of repute, named Jokisch, who in three months from the
start taught her to play a Mozart sonata. Five years of hard study
enabled her to appear at a concert at Marchiennes, when she played a
concerto by De Bériot and the rondo capriccioso by Saint-Saëns. The
following year she played at Aix-la-Chapelle, and made such an
impression that several offers of concert engagements were made, but
were declined by her mother on the score of the child's health, and for
three years after this she never appeared at a concert.

One summer, during the holidays, she met August Wilhelmj, who was
charmed with her talent, and devoted his mornings for two months to
giving her lessons daily. At the end of that time he emphasised his
appreciation by making her a present of a valuable violin. She still
continued her regular studies with Jokisch, until, acting on the advice
of her friends, she obtained a hearing from Ysaye, and played for him
Bach's prelude and fugue in G minor.

Ysaye at once recognised her immense ability, and advised her to enter
the conservatoire at Brussels, which she did, with the result that in
eight months she carried off the first prize, being then only fifteen
years of age. She continued her studies for three more years, and was
frequently employed as a substitute for Ysaye, as professor, to teach
his classes while he was absent on concert tours.

In 1894 she appeared with him at a number of important concerts, and
shortly afterwards made her first concert tour, visiting many of the
principal towns of Germany. In November, 1895, she made her first
appearance in London, where she was pronounced to be, with the exception
of Lady Hallé, the most remarkable lady violinist who had ever appeared
before the public in England, and where her excellent technique, perfect
intonation, warmth of feeling, and musical insight were highly, almost
extravagantly, praised.

In August, 1898, Mlle. Sethe married Doctor Saenger, a _littérateur_,
and professor of philosophy at Berlin, but she continues her career as a
violinist, and has made several tours of Europe. She has been compared
to Rubinstein, inasmuch as her remarkable musical temperament and
irresistible impulsiveness carry her at times almost beyond the limits
of her instrument, but these are the very qualities by which she
captivates and carries away her hearers.

Among other European ladies who have made their mark as violinists, and
whose stars are in the ascendant, may be mentioned Sophie Jaffé, who has
been called the greatest of all women violinists, and Frida Scotta.

Although many years behind the continent of Europe in musical life, and
with a musical atmosphere not nearly as dense as that found in almost
any village of Italy, France, or Germany, America has contributed to
the musical world many shining lights during the past few years. Mlle.
Urso has been claimed as an American violinist, though she was born in
Europe and was a good violinist before she reached these shores, but in
1864, in New York, Anna Senkrah was born, who for a few years rivalled
Teresina Tua.

The real name of Arma Senkrah was Harkness, which for professional
purposes she "turned end for end," as the sailors would say, and dropped
an "s." After Miss Harkness had been taught the elements of music by her
mother, she went to Brussels to study under Wieniawski, and then to
Paris, where she became a pupil of Massart She is said also to have
taken lessons of Vieuxtemps and of Arno Hilf.

In 1881 she won the first prize at the Paris Conservatoire, a feat which
always stamps the winner "artist." From 1877 to 1880 Arma Senkrah
travelled a great deal throughout Europe, and in 1882 she played, under
her proper name, at the Crystal Palace, London. She was created, at
Weimar, a chamber virtuoso, by the grand duke. Here she met and shortly
afterwards married a lawyer named Hoffman, and disappeared from the
concert platform.

New York has contributed other stars to the violin firmament, for Nettie
Carpenter and Geraldine Morgan are names which have become well known.

Miss Carpenter went abroad at an early age, though not until she had
appeared in concerts in her native city, and created considerable
interest.

On going to Paris, she was successful in passing the entrance
examinations for the Conservatoire, and in 1884 won the first prize for
violin playing. In 1882 she appeared in London at the promenade
concerts, and again in 1884, when she confirmed the reputation which she
had made two years previously, at the same concerts. From that time on
she went through the usual routine of the concert violinist, with
considerable success.

In 1894 she married Leo Stern, the violoncello player, but the union did
not continue for long, Mr. Stern becoming about four years later the
husband of Miss Suzanne Adams, the opera singer.

Miss Geraldine Morgan is the daughter of John P. Morgan, who was for
some years organist of Old Trinity Church, New York. She studied in her
native city under Leopold Damrosch, besides which she received much
instruction from her father. Then she went to Leipzig, where she studied
with Schradieck, after which she was the pupil in Berlin of Joachim,
under whose guidance she remained eight years. She was the first
American who ever gained the Mendelssohn prize.

Miss Morgan has made tours through the Continent and Great Britain, and
had the honour of playing the Bach double concerto with Joachim at the
Crystal Palace. In 1891 she appeared in New York under the auspices of
Walter Damrosch.

A lady who holds a high position among the violinists of the world is
Miss Maud Powell, who was born in Aurora, Ill., in 1868. Her father is
American and her mother German. She began her musical education at the
age of four, by taking piano lessons. At eight she took up the violin,
and made such excellent progress that, when she was thirteen years old,
she was taken to Leipzig, where she studied under Schradieck, and
received her diploma in a year, playing also at one of the Gewandhaus
concerts.

[Illustration: MAUD POWELL]

She next went to Paris, where she was the first selected out of eighty
applicants for admission to the Conservatoire. In the following year she
accepted an engagement for a tour in England, and had the honour of
playing before the royal family. While in London Joachim heard her, and
expressed his approval of her capabilities by inviting her to go to
Berlin and become one of his pupils, which she accordingly did, and
remained with him for two years.

In 1885 she made her début in Berlin at the Philharmonic concerts, when
she played the Bruch concerto, which she also played in Philadelphia
later in the same year. Her performance in America brought her much
praise, and she was declared to be a marvellously gifted woman, one who
in every feature of her playing disclosed the instincts and gifts of a
born artist, though she had not yet reached the heights of her ability.
Since that time she has gained in breadth, and has become a mature
artist.

Miss Powell has appeared in the best concerts throughout America, and
has gained a reputation second to no American violinist. By many she is
declared to be the equal of Soldat and Wietrowitz in tone, technique,
and interpretative power. She has an immense repertoire, and is also a
student of literature. She also is said to have been the first to
establish a female quartet in America.

The latest American lady violinist to gain honours abroad is Miss
Leonora Jackson, who won the Mendelssohn state prize at Berlin, in 1898,
and who has gained a great reputation by her performances before the
most important musical organisations in Europe.

Miss Jackson was fortunate enough to attract the attention of Mrs.
Grover Cleveland, who admired her talent, and, with Mr. George
Vanderbilt, sent her abroad. For two years she studied in Paris, and
then went to Berlin, where she became a pupil of Joachim. In Berlin she
made her début in 1896, with the Philharmonic Orchestra, which was
conducted by Joachim on that occasion. Shortly afterwards she was
commanded by the Empress of Germany to play at the Royal Opera House, in
Berlin, and she soon earned for herself a position amongst the best of
the rising violinists of the day.

When she appeared in London, in 1898, she surprised and delighted the
audience, displaying a fine tone, natural musical feeling, and complete
technique. Few violinists can play with such quiet, intense sentiment.
Miss Jackson, though but twenty years of age, is already a veteran
concert player, for she has appeared in many cities of Europe, and was
already known in America before she went to Berlin. She played in July,
1899, before the Queen of England at Windsor Castle, and again in August
at Osborne House, in the Isle of Wight.

The time has long since gone by when mere showy technique would earn a
reputation for any violinist, male or female, and she who expects to be
numbered with the great violinists must be first of all a musician,
capable of interpreting the greatest works. If in addition to this she
has "the divine spark," she will be truly great.




CHAPTER XI.

FAMOUS QUARTETS.


Quartet playing is at once the delight and the despair of the amateur,
who finds no greater pleasure than an evening spent in endeavouring to
